comparative effectiveness research under obamacare:  
a slippery slope to health care rationing 
kathryn nix

no. 2679  |  april 12, 2012

abstract
one element of the patient protection 
and affordable care act (ppaca) 
is the advancement of comparative 
effectiveness research (cer). 
intended to compare available 
treatment options, cer can benefit 
patients if used for informational 
purposes only, but it could also be 
harmful in practice. the expansion of 
the medicare bureaucracy under the 
ppaca will allow the use of cer for 
more government micromanagement 
of personal medical decision making
hurting patients, doctors, and the 
practice of medicine.

this paper, in its entirety, can be found at
http://report.heritage.org/bg2679
produced by the center for health policy studies
the heritage foundation
214 massachusetts avenue, ne
washington, dc 20002
(202) 546-4400 | heritage.org
nothing written here is to be construed as necessarily 
reflecting the views of the heritage foundation or 
as an attempt to aid or hinder the passage of any bill 
before congress.

one of the most important goals 

of health care reform is to slow 
down the runaway growth in health 
care spending. the united states 
spent 17.6 percent of its gross domes-
tic product (gdp) on health care in 
2009, projected to rise to almost 20 
percent of gdp by 2020. federal 
spending on medicare, the federal 
health care program for the elderly 
and disabled, is of particular con-
cern. medicares cost accounted for 
3.7 percent of gdp in 2011 and is 
growing faster than any other area 
of federal spending due to increasing 
health care costs and the rising num-
ber of elderly eligible for the program. 
another reason for the programs 
ballooning cost is its fee-for-service 
structure, which rewards providers 
for quantity of services and offers 
little incentive for patients to avoid 
doctors and other providers who 
offer poor value.

meanwhile, the idea of advancing 
comparative effectiveness research 
(cer)defined by the institute of 
medicine as the generation and 
synthesis of evidence that compares 
the benefits and harms of alternative 
methods to prevent, diagnose, treat, 
and monitor a clinical condition or 
to improve the delivery of care1
has gained traction. the patient 
protection and affordable care act 

 due to ballooning health care 

costs, especially runaway spend-
ing on medicare, paying for 
what works using comparative 
effectiveness research (cer)
comparing available treatment 
optionshas gained traction.

 the patient protection and 

affordable care act (ppaca) 
has created a quasi-governmen-
tal entity, the patient-centered 
outcomes research institute 
(pcori), to advance the use of 
cer by doctors, patients, and 
administrators.

 cer can be beneficial by inform-

ing patients and physicians about 
alternative options for treating 
a certain condition. but in order 
to improve quality of care, cer 
must not edge out other crucial 
factors guiding medical deci-
sions, including the physicians 
training and experience and the 
patients unique circumstance 
and preferences.

 the ppaca expands the medi-

care bureaucracy and allows 
more government micromanage-
ment of what should be personal 
medical decisions.

 using research findings to 

strengthen bureaucracy is a los-
ing combination that will erode 
quality of care for americans.

backgroundertalking pointsbackgrounder | no. 2679
april 12, 2012

(ppaca) has created a quasi-govern-
mental entity, the patient-centered 
outcomes research institute 
(pcori), to advance cer and its use 
by doctors, patients, and others.

comparing available treatment 

options could certainly be beneficial 
by informing patients and physi-
cians of the trade-offs of alternative 
options for treating a certain condi-
tion. but to improve quality of care, 
cer findings must be considered just 
one part of decision making.

cer must not edge out other 

crucial factors guiding medical deci-
sions, including a physicians training 
and experience and a patients values, 
preferences, goals, and lifestyle. in 
countries with nationalized health 
care, such as the united kingdom, 
comparative and cost-effective-
ness information is used to inform 
mandatory coverage and payment 
decisions, and this limits choice. 
the ppaca expands the medicare 
bureaucracy and allows more gov-
ernment micromanagement of what 
should be personal medical decisions.

cer in practice

being able to compare treat-

ment options and pick the best, most 
cost-effective ones sounds idealin 
theory. real-life applications of cer, 

however, can and often do take a dif-
ferent form.

the patient-centered 

outcomes research institute. 
pcori is established as a nonprofit 
organization funded by medicare 
dollars and a new fee on private 
insurance. the institute is gov-
erned by key stakeholders in the 
health care system, appointed by 
the government accountability 
office, and by the presidentially 
appointed directors of the national 
institutes of health and the agency 
for healthcare research and quality. 
pcori is responsible for identifying 
national research priorities, estab-
lishing and executing a research 
agenda, and communicating research 
findings to interested parties.2

the first draft of pcoris national 

priorities and research agenda did 
little to clarify how the informa-
tion it produces will be used.3 the 
draft includes few specifics beyond 
what was already established in the 
ppaca. pcoris influence over how 
cer is actually used will be more 
or less limited to how it allocates its 
relatively small financial resources, 
but it will not be clear how it priori-
tizes funding for certain diseases and 
conditions until it actually begins to 
do so later in 2012. obtaining cost 

information on different treatments 
will be one goal of the institute, the 
draft made clear.

while pcori uses the term 

patient-centered, its findings will 
not necessarily be used to pro-
mote patient-centered care. the 
institute was originally named the 
comparative effectiveness research 
institute, but the name was changed 
because of the controversy that this 
clear assertion of its intentions cre-
ated.4 the objectives of the institute 
remain largely the same, but accord-
ing to pcoris executive director, 
joe v. selby, the name change has 
inspired pcori to become more 
patient-focused in its research.

according to the pcori website, 

patients will play a major role in 
pcoris work by telling pcori what 
health care outcomes they value.5 
but it is imperative to differentiate 
between patient-centered research 
and patient-centered carethe 
former does not ensure the latter. 
including input from patients and 
stakeholders in pcoris research 
priorities and agenda could make 
findings more useful for doctors 
and patients, but the ppaca gives 
medicare, in particular, the author-
ity to use cer in ways that will 
limit patient choice and physician 

1. 

institute of medicine, initial national priorities for comparative effectiveness research, report brief, june 2009, p. 1, at http://www.hrsonline.org/policy/
legislationtakeaction/upload/cer-report-brief-6-22-09.pdf (accessed february 27, 2012).
patient protection and affordable care act, public law 111-148,  6301.

2. 
3.  kathryn nix, inside the patient-centered outcomes research institute: no promise of protection from government rationing, heritage foundation 

webmemo no. 3474, january 26, 2012, at http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/2012/01/patient-centered-outcomes-research-institutes-health-care-
priorities.

4.  cer entered the national spotlight when the american recovery and reinvestment act of 2009 (also known as the stimulus bill) granted $1.1 billion to the 

agency for healthcare research and quality, the national institutes of health, and the department of health and human services to fund cer. the law also 
created the federal coordinating council for comparative effectiveness research to coordinate research and funding, which was replaced by pcori under the 
ppaca.
pcori, about us, 2012, at http://www.pcori.org/about/ (accessed february 27, 2012).

5. 

2

backgrounder | no. 2679
april 12, 2012

autonomy, making the opposite of 
patient-centered care more likely 
than not.

cer in the united kingdom. 

cer use in the u.k. has been a far cry 
from what is implied by the rhetoric 
used to promote pcori. rather than 
focusing on the individual needs 
of patients, the united kingdoms 
national health service (nhs) uses 
comparative and cost-effectiveness 
information to limit options as a bud-
getary tool.

the nhs offers health coverage 

to all british citizens and determines 
which treatments will be covered 
and paid for, and under which cir-
cumstances. decisions are based on 
recommendations by the national 
institute for health and clinical 
excellence (nice), whose stated 
purpose is to create clinical guide-
lines and standardize care using 
cost-effectiveness information, but 
the nhs is required to adhere to all 
of the recommendations made by 
nice.

if a treatment is not covered, 

patients are able to go outside the 
nhs and receive it privately without 
regulatory or statutory obstaclesif 
they are able to afford this. (because 
of medicares restrictions on private 
contracting, american seniors would 
not have this same option.)

under the nhs, british patients 

have been refused effective treat-
ments for several conditions because 
of cost.6 after its initial assessment, 
nice decided that fingolimod, a 
promising new medicine shown to 
reduce relapses and delay disease 
progression in multiple sclerosis 
(ms) patients, would not be covered. 
based on the available clinical evi-
dence and economic analysis, nice 
claimed, our independent commit-
tee concluded that fingolimod would 
not be effective good use of nhs 
resources. but according to u.k. 
neurologist eli silber:

the computer models used to 
determine cost effectiveness 
dont take into account the sig-
nificant amount of money that 
would be spent on patients at the 
end of life with severe disability, 
when there isnt much we can do. 
 ms often affects young people, 
with families and work, and this 
decision denies them the oppor-
tunity to have the risk of dis-
ability reduced at a much earlier 
stage.7

after receiving criticism for its 
decision, nice changed its guide-
lines to allow access to the treat-
ment for a subgroup of british ms 

patients.8 however, other decisions 
made by the rationing body may not 
receive the same level of attention.

by focusing on short-term savings, 

decisions that deny coverage can 
worsen the health of the population 
and increase long-term costs. helen 
evans, a nurse and health fellow 
at the london-based adam smith 
institute, highlighted nices deci-
sion to provide protelos, a drug that 
treats osteoporosis, to only a small 
number of patients as a last resort. 
she writes that clinicians and osteo-
porosis support groups have pointed 
out that more than 70,000 hip frac-
tures result in 13,000 premature 
deaths in the u.k. each year and that 
these otherwise avoidable episodes 
needlessly cost the nhs billions of 
pounds.9

bringing cer to the united 
states. proponents of the ppaca 
dismiss concerns that a u.k.-style 
system will arise under the health 
law, but the evolution of pcori 
implies that the idea may not be so 
farfetched. senators max baucus 
(dmt) and kent conrad (dnd) 
first introduced the comparative 
effectiveness research act in 2008 
in order to create a new entity 
called the health care comparative 
effectiveness research institute, 
with the goal of advancing cer.10 

6.  helen evans, comparative effectiveness in health care reform: lessons from abroad, heritage foundation backgrounder no. 2239, february 4, 2009, at 

7. 

http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/2009/02/comparative-effectiveness-in-health-care-reform-lessons-from-abroad, and gurjeet guram and robert 
e. moffit, the concept of a federal health board: learning from britains experience, heritage foundation webmemo no. 2154, december 4, 2008, at http://
www.heritage.org/research/reports/2008/12/the-concept-of-a-federal-health-board-learning-from-britains-experience.
jenny hope, breakthrough ms pill rejected as too expensive by nhs watchdog (but you can get it in u.s. and germany), mailonline.com, august 5, 2011, 
at http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-2022767/miracle-ms-pill-rejected-expensive-nhs-watchdog-available-u-s-germany.html (accessed february 
27, 2012), and news release, ms drug should not be prescribed on nhs, says draft guidance, national health services, august 4, 2011, at http://www.nice.
org.uk/newsroom/pressreleases/msdrugdraftguidance.jsp?zbrandid=4337&zidtype=ch&zid=7637383&zsubscriberid=1024035413&zbdom=http://npc.
informz.net (accessed february 27, 2012).

8.  national institute for health and clinical excellence, final appraisal determination: fingolimod for the treatment of highly active relapsing-remitting 

multiple sclerosis, march 2012, at http://www.nice.org.uk/nicemedia/live/12170/58500/58500.pdf (accessed april 4, 2012).
evans, comparative effectiveness in health care reform: lessons from abroad.

9. 
10.  comparative effectiveness research act of 2008 (s. 3408), at http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname=110_cong_bills&docid=f:s3408is.

txt.pdf (accessed february 27, 2012).

3

backgrounder | no. 2679
april 12, 2012

the proposal included almost no 
limitation on the use of cer with-
in medicare, and the secretary of 
health and human services, or the 
secretarys designee, was included 
on the institutes board of governors, 
allowing the department of health 
and human services (hhs) ample 
opportunity to influence the direc-
tion of research.

in june 2009, senators baucus 
and conrad offered a revised ver-
sion of their earlier bill, changing the 
institutes name to todays patient-
centered outcomes research 
institute.11 by the time the ppaca 
was signed into law, the original enti-
ty had been revised to include addi-
tional restrictions to make pcori 
politically viable.

this idea of a cer board or insti-

tute was not unique. before tak-
ing office, president barack obama 
chose former democratic senate 
majority leader tom daschle to 
serve as secretary of hhs and 
director of the new white house 
office of health reform and jeanne 
lambrew to serve as deputy direc-
tor of the white house office of 
health reform. in 2008, daschle and 
lambrew co-authored a proposal 
to overhaul the health care system, 
which included the creation of a 
federal health board to use cer to 
make coverage decisions. the board 
would define evidence-based health 
benefits and lower overall spending 

by determining which medicines, 
treatments, and procedures are most 
effectiveand identifying those that 
do not justify their high price tags.12
under their proposal, all federal 
health programs would have been 
required to adhere to the recom-
mendations made by daschle and 
lambrews federal health board. 
daschle and lambrew even suggest-
ed linking the boards recommenda-
tions to the existing tax exclusion for 
health insurance, applying deci-
sions to private coverage as well.13 
ultimately, daschle was not appoint-
ed as secretary of hhs, but jeanne 
lambrew was chosen to serve as 
director of the hhs office of health 
reform.

appointed donald berwick, m.d., to 
serve as administrator of the centers 
for medicare and medicaid services 
(cms). much of berwicks commen-
tary praises the united kingdoms 

others in the obama 

administration have been no less 
vocal about their support for the 
top-down use of cer. peter orszag, 
former director of the office of 
management and budget, testi-
fied before the senate finance 
committee: to alter providers 
behavior, it is probably necessary to 
combine comparative effectiveness 
research with aggressive promul-
gation of standards and changes in 
financial and other incentives.14

finally, president obama 

nhs, about which berwick claims, i 
am romantic about the nhs; i love 
it.15 his vision for health care reform 
depends on strong centralized power: 
i cannot believe that the individual 
health care consumer can enforce 
through choice the proper configu-
rations of a system as massive and 
complex as health care. that is for 
leaders to do.16

berwicks comments about the 

role of government and elected 
officials are exactly what must be 
avoided as cer makes its way to 
the united states. under the ppaca, 
cer will clearly not be used solely as 
a passive informational tool to guide 
decision making.

do ppaca limits on cer use 

carry any weight? the ppaca 
does limit pcoris role and its use 
of research findings. the institute 
is forbidden from issuing coverage 
guidelines or making treatment rec-
ommendations and shall not devel-
op or employ a dollars-per-quality 
adjusted life year  as a threshold to 
establish what type of health care 
is cost effective or recommended.17 
but while the institute may not 
develop a dollars-per-quality mea-
sure of value, it is not explicitly 
restricted from supporting research 
on cost-effectiveness.

the ppaca also limits how 
pcori findings can be used in 
administering medicare, but it 
does not prevent cer findings from 

11.  patient-centered outcomes research act of 2009 (s. 1213), at http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname=111_cong_bills&docid=f:s1213is.

txt.pdf (accessed february 28, 2012).

12.  tom daschle, critical: what we can do about the health-care crisis (new york: thomas dunne books, 2008), p. 136.
13. 
14.  peter r. orszag, opportunities to increase efficiency in health care, testimony before health reform summit of the committee on finance, u.s. senate, 

ibid., p. 179.

june 16, 2008, at http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/ftpdocs/93xx/doc9384/06-16-healthsummit.pdf (accessed february 28, 2012).

15.  donald m. berwick, a transatlantic review of the nhs at 60, physicians for a national health program, july 1, 2008, at http://www.pnhp.org/news/2010/

may/a-transatlantic-review-of-the-nhs-at-60 (accessed february 28, 2012).
ibid.

16. 
17.  patient protection and affordable care act.

4

backgrounder | no. 2679
april 12, 2012

influencing this or other arms of the 
government in their decisions on 
coverage and payment. sean tunis, 
president of the center for medical 
technology policy, states that the 
ppacas statutory language does not 
prevent medicare from considering 
cer studies generated by pcori or 
other researchers for making cov-
erage decisions, although it does 
impose some restrictions.18

the secretary of hhs is prohib-

ited from using cer to treat the lives 
of the elderly as being of less value 
than others and from using quality 
adjusted life-years or other similar 
measures as a threshold to deter-
mine coverage, reimbursement, or 
incentive programs.19 but beyond 
this, the limits are decidedly vague, 
leaving the future role of cer in 
medicare open-ended. meanwhile, 
other parts of the health law open 
the door for medicare to use cer 
to micromanage the practice of 
medicine.

the new medicare: more 
bureaucracy, less freedom
the ppaca threatens patient 

choice and physician autonomy for 
patients and providers who partici-
pate in medicare. reductions in pro-
vider payments and delivery system 
changes implicitly allow the program 
to ration care through so-called 
improvements in value and efficiency.
the ppaca allows government to 

micromanage the cost and utiliza-
tion of medical goods and services 

in an attempt to eke out relatively 
small savings from a wildly insolvent 
program. this approach will not be 
sufficient to save medicare, nor will 
it benefit patients since cer is a 
required tool in this failing exercise.

the independent payment 

advisory board. the new 
independent payment advisory 
board (ipab), composed of 15 mem-
bers appointed by the president and 
confirmed by the senate, was created 
by the ppaca to enforce a per capita 
spending growth target in medicare. 
if spending exceeds the set threshold, 
the boards recommendations will 
automatically go into effect unless 
congress passes legislation that 
equally reduces growth in spend-
ing. otherwise, ipabs decisions 
will bypass congressional approval 
and require a two-thirds majority of 
congress to override them.

ipab is mostly limited to tinker-

ing with provider payments to reduce 
cost growth and is restricted from 
explicitly rationing care (though 
no definition of rationing is sup-
plied). but ipab could still give other 
government authorities the ability 
to ration care using information like 
that produced by pcori. american 
enterprise institute scholar and 
physician scott gottlieb warns, 
rather than making the tough clini-
cal judgments themselves, the ipab 
would grant cms authority to rely on 
judgment of the agencys largely thin 
clinical staff about the relative ben-
efits of competing treatments.20

according to gottlieb, ipab could 

give the centers for medicare and 
medicaid services the authority to 
consolidate drugs, medical devices, 
and other services under one pay-
ment code and then pay for the least 
costly alternative among compara-
ble approaches.

medicare hospital value-

based purchasing. another way 
that medicare could end up rationing 
care is by adjusting provider reim-
bursement under the new value-
based purchasing program (vbp). 
value-based purchasing was includ-
ed in the ppaca as acknowledgment 
that medicare has long struggled to 
reward certain providers and punish 
others based on value of care.

in other areas of the economy, 
where the purchaser of a good or 
service and its user are generally one 
and the same, consumers achieve 
these goals. supporters of the ppaca, 
however, ignore this fact by trying to 
replace the role of the consumer with 
more central planning. as ethics and 
public policy center fellow james 
capretta states, efforts to con-
trol costs from the top-down have 
always devolved into price setting 
and across-the-board payment-rate 
reductions, which is detrimental to 
the quality of american medicine.21
despite claims by ppaca support-
ers that improvements in quality and 
efficiency in the ppaca will reverse 
medicares growing financial pre-
dicament, the congressional budget 
office finds that demonstrations 

18.  sean r. tunis, robert a. berenson, steve e. phurrough, and penny e. mohr, improving the quality and efficiency of the medicare program through coverage 
policy, urban institute and robert wood johnson foundation, august 2011, at http://www.rwjf.org/files/research/72761summarymedicarecoveragequickstri
ke20110816.pdf (accessed february 28, 2012).

19.  patient protection and affordable care act.
20.  scott gottlieb, ipab: the controversial consequences for medicare and seniors, statement before the subcommittee on health, committee on energy and 
commerce, u.s. house of representatives, july 13, 2011, at http://republicans.energycommerce.house.gov/media/file/hearings/health/071311/gottlieb.pdf 
(accessed february 28, 2012).
james c. capretta, why the obama health plan is not entitlement reform, galen institute, july 2010, p. 17, at http://www.thenewatlantis.com/
doclib/20100804_caprettahealthplan.pdf (accessed february 28, 2012).

21. 

5

backgrounder | no. 2679
april 12, 2012

that paid bonuses to providers on the 
basis of their quality scores, esti-
mated savings, or both, produced 
little or no savings.22 nevertheless, 
the ppaca requires medicare to 
measure providers performance and 
alter their payments based on a scor-
ing system in its new value-based 
purchasing program.

beginning in 2013, hospitals will 
face financial incentives to comply 
with federal quality measures. the 
secretary of hhs is responsible for 
determining the performance stan-
dards and methodology used to cal-
culate hospital performance scores, 
which will reflect achievement and 
improvement, and, beginning in 2014, 
include efficiency measures, such as 
medicare spending per beneficiary. 
the law also calls for extension of 
vbp into other areas of care.

hospital payments will reflect 

performance on the scored measures, 
but the performance payment is not 
a true bonus, since its funding is 
made available by first cutting base 
payments across the board by 1 per-
cent ($850 million) in the first year, 
gradually increasing to 2 percent by 
2017. hospitals will be scored on both 
their achievement relative to other 
hospitals and their improvement, 
and payment will reflect the higher 
score of the two. penalizing some in 
order to reward others is like grading 
on a curve, which makes it impos-
sible for every student in class to get 
an a.

the 13 measures chosen to grade 

hospitals in the programs first year 
were selected from those used cur-
rently under the medicare hospital 

quality reporting program for 
five prevalent conditions, and the 
secretary of hhs has broad discre-
tion to add or remove measures. 
though the first year includes only 
a handful of quality measures, it is 
clear that more will be added in the 
future.23

in its first year, the vbp program 

may seem fairly benign, but it is 
unlikely to remain so. even ipab 
could use the program to exercise 
its role as arbiter of cost-containing 
changes in medicare. one of the few 
mechanisms available to the ipab is 
to reduce provider reimbursements. 
one way that ipab could do this and 
simultaneously claim to advance its 
other goal to protect and improve 
medicare beneficiaries access to nec-
essary and evidence-based items and 
services (a directive that gives the 
board just as much authority to limit 
care as it does to protect it) would be 
to drastically reduce base hospital 
payments and make an increasing 
portion of provider reimbursement 
contingent on performance scores 
and adherence to vbp program qual-
ity measures.

as cer and other evidence is used 

to inform the quality measures and 
increase their size and scope, ipab 
could effectively make the measures 
mandatory for providers. even if the 
vbp program as created in the stat-
ute is left unchanged, it could still 
harm patient care.

consequences of value-based 
purchasing for patient care

cer is already seen as a via-
ble basis for health care quality 

measures, and the door is open for its 
use in the vbp program. according 
to hhs, when hospitals follow 
these types of proven best practices, 
patients receive higher quality care 
and see better outcomes.24 but 
the evidence indicates otherwise. 
measuring and rewarding quality 
according to measures of processes 
or outcomes can have negative conse-
quences for patients and physicians 
alike. vbp could encourage physi-
cian behavior that does not put the 
patient first, meanwhile treating pro-
viders in ways that are unfair, ineq-
uitable, and unlikely to truly reflect 
better-value, high-quality care.

a strategy doomed from the 
start. evidence from government 
demonstration programs shows that 
value-based purchasing is an ineffec-
tive strategy to improve outcomes. 
even so, the authors of the ppaca 
allowed it to become law, affecting 
almost every hospital in the country.
legislation in 2001 and 2003 gave 

cms the authority to collaborate 
with premier, a nationwide orga-
nization of not-for-profit hospitals, 
to perform the premier hospital 
quality incentive demonstration 
(phqid). the demonstration pro-
gram offered 278 participating hos-
pitals incentive payments to improve 
their performance based on 34 qual-
ity measures, 27 of which measured 
process and seven of which mea-
sured outcomes.

cms reported early on that the 
program led hospitals to improve 
their performance scores by 17.2 per-
centage points within the first three 
years. other studies reached similar 

22.  congressional budget office, lessons from medicares demonstration projects on disease management, care coordination, and value-based payment, 

january 18, 2012, at http://www.cbo.gov/doc.cfm?index=12663 (accessed february 28, 2012).

23.  news release, administration implements new health reform provision to improve care quality, lower costs, healthcare.gov, april 29, 2011, at http://www.

healthcare.gov/news/factsheets/2011/04/valuebasedpurchasing04292011a.html (accessed april 4, 2012).
ibid.

24. 

6

backgrounder | no. 2679
april 12, 2012

conclusions.25 but the focus of these 
studies was on process measures, not 
actual outcomes, which do not tell 
the whole story. rodney hayward, 
m.d., warns that experience with 
performance measurement  has 
generally shown that what you mea-
sure improves, but unfortunately, we 
often settle for measuring that which 
is simple and easy to gauge and then 
sit back and celebrate the improve-
ments in our measures.26

other studies assessed whether 
the quality of outcomes improved 
under the demonstration and came 
to different conclusions. one study 
analyzed the demonstrations short-
term effects on mortality and cost 
reduction, following a previous 
analysis that showed that the dem-
onstration had no impact on mortal-
ity for patients suffering from acute 
myocardial infarction.27 the results 
showed that the demonstration did 
not significantly reduce mortality or 
cost. while mortality did decrease 
for the measured conditions, simi-
lar reductions occurred at hospitals 
that did not participate, and reduc-
tions were also observed for condi-
tions that were not measured. the 

study concluded that by not reduc-
ing mortality or cost growth, the 
phqid has made little impact on the 
value of inpatient care purchased by 
medicare.28

cbo analysis later concluded that 
the premier demonstration had no 
effect on medicare spending and 
only slightly improved quality of 
care based on the measures adopt-
ed for those demonstrations.29 a 
study published in the new england 
journal of medicine assessing the 
long-term effects of the six-year pro-
gram at its conclusion echoed these 
results. according to the authors, 
they found no evidence that the 
largest hospital-based pay-for-per-
formance program led to a decrease 
in 30-day mortality. expectations 
of improved outcomes for programs 
modeled after premier hqid should 
therefore remain modest.30 the 
ppacas value-based purchasing 
program, which begins in 2012, falls 
directly under this category.

in addition to the growing evi-

dence that vbp will be ineffec-
tive, several other studies high-
light the harmful consequences 
that can arise from these kinds of 

pay-for-performance programs. 
researchers in the united kingdom 
examined the impact of pay-for-
performance in the u.k. and in 
california on primary-care physi-
cians and concluded that adverse 
effects included encouraging physi-
cians to avoid sicker patients, exac-
erbating disparities, and neglecting 
types of care for which quality is not 
measured.31

misaligned incentives 

threaten quality of care. quality 
measures do not always translate 
into what is best for an individual 
patient, in which case practic-
ing medicine to the test can 
harm patients. harvard school of 
medicines jerome groopman, m.d., 
writes, over the past decade, federal 
choice architectsi.e., doctors and 
other experts acting for the govern-
ment and making use of research 
on comparative effectivenesshave 
repeatedly identified best practices, 
only to have them shown to be inef-
fective or even deleterious.32
in 2007, the journal of the 

american medical association pub-
lished the findings of a study which 
showed that none of the measures 

25.  premier hospital quality incentive demonstration: rewarding superior quality care, centers for medicare and medicaid services fact sheet, july 2009, at 
http://www.qualitycoalition.net/data/sites/2/media/position-statement/hqid-fact-sheet.pdf (accessed february 28, 2012), and peter k. lindenauer et al., 
public reporting and pay for performance in hospital quality improvement, the new england journal of medicine, february 2007, at http://www.nejm.org/doi/
full/10.1056/nejmsa064964#t=articlemethods (accessed february 28, 2012).

26.  rodney a. hayward, performance measurement in search of a path, the new england journal of medicine, march 2007, p. 951, at http://www.nejm.org/doi/

full/10.1056/nejme068285 (accessed february 12, 2012).

27.  andrew m. ryan, james f. burgess, christopher p. tompkins, and stanley s. wallack, the relationship between medicares process of care quality measures 

and mortality, inquiry, vol. 46, no. 3 (september 2009), pp. 274290, at http://www.inquiryjournalonline.org/doi/abs/10.5034/inquiryjrnl_46.03.274 
(accessed february 28, 2012).
ibid.

28. 
29.  congressional budget office, lessons from medicares demonstration projects on disease management, care coordination, and value-based payment.
30.  ashish k. jha, karen e. joynt, e. john orav, and arnold m. epstein, the long-term effect of premier pay for performance on patient outcomes, the new 

england journal of medicine, march 28, 2012, at http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/nejmsa1112351#t=article (accessed april 4, 2012).

31.  ruth mcdonald and martin roland, pay for performance in primary care in england and california: comparison of unintended consequences, annals of 

family medicine, vol. 7, no. 2 (march 2009), pp. 121127, at http://www.annfammed.org/cgi/reprint/7/2/121 (accessed february 28, 2012).

32.  jerome groopman, health care: who knows best? the new york review of books, february 11, 2010, at http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2010/

feb/11/health-care-who-knows-best/ (accessed february 28, 2012).

7

backgrounder | no. 2679
april 12, 2012

commonly used to quantify per-
formance for treating heart failure 
was strongly associated with better 
mortality rates.33 a 2010 university 
of michigan study came to a similar 
conclusion when comparing sur-
gery outcomes at 2,189 hospitals for 
their adherence to process measures 
reported by hospital compare, a 
website used to publicly report 
hospital compliance with mea-
sures under the medicare hospital 
quality reporting program.34 the 
authors found little evidence of a 
consistent relationship between 
hospital compliance with process-
es of care and operative mortal-
ity rate. furthermore, they claim, 
currently available information on 
the hospital compare website will 
not help patients identify hospitals 
with better outcomes for high-risk 
surgery.35again, a rigid model with 
the wrong focus may be at fault.

since such performance measures 

have fallen short time and again, 
medicares value-based purchasing 
program is most likely, at best, to 
lead to arbitrary reimbursement lev-
els for hospitals at inequitable rates 
with no resulting benefit. worse is 
the possibility of encouraging medi-
cal professionals to act in ways that 
are unnecessary or even harmful to 

a patient in order to comply with the 
measures. groopman cites several 
examples:

medicare specified that it was a 
best practice to tightly control 
blood sugar levels in critically ill 
patients in intensive care. that 
measure of quality was not only 
shown to be wrong but resulted 
in a higher likelihood of death 
when compared to measures 
allowing a more flexible treat-
ment and higher blood sugar. 
similarly, government officials 
directed that normal blood sugar 
levels should be maintained 
in ambulatory diabetics with 
cardiovascular disease. studies 
in canada and the united states 
showed that this best prac-
tice was misconceived. there 
were more deaths when doc-
tors obeyed this rule than when 
patients received what the 
government had designated as 
subpar treatment (in which sugar 
levels were allowed to vary).36

in addition to potentially encour-

aging physicians to do the wrong 
thing, quality measures with finan-
cial strings attached can punish 
doctors for doing the right thing. 

related to the vbp, the ppaca will 
also financially penalize hospitals 
with high readmission rates for cer-
tain medical conditions beginning 
in 2012.37 again, however, this model 
could fail to achieve its intended goal 
of improving quality.

a study by cleveland clinic 

researchers showed that high pro-
vider readmission rates might not 
necessarily indicate lower quality 
care: while the cleveland clinic 
had a higher-than-average readmis-
sion rate for heart failure, its average 
30-day mortality rate for the same 
condition was lower than average.38 
the researchers concluded that if 
a hospital has a lower mortality 
rate, then a greater proportion of its 
discharged patients are eligible for 
readmission. as such, to some extent, 
a higher readmission rate may be a 
consequence of successful care.39 
one of the researchers, dr. eiran z. 
gorodeski, further warns that the 
message to patients and the general 
public is that they should be wary of 
seemingly simple measures of qual-
ity of care.40

several health care systems 

already use electronic health records 
and evidence-based quality mea-
sures to standardize care, but the 
crucial difference is that physicians 

33.  gregg c. fonarow et al., association between performance measures and clinical outcomes for patients hospitalized with heart failure, journal of the 

american medical association, vol. 297, no. 1 (january 2007), at http://jama.ama-assn.org/cgi/reprint/297/1/61 (accessed february 28, 2012).

34.  lauren h. nicholas, nicholas h. osborne, john d. birkmeyer, and justin b. dimick, hospital process compliance and surgical outcomes in medicare 

beneficiaries, archives of surgery, vol. 145, no. 10 (2010), pp. 9991004, at http://archsurg.ama-assn.org/cgi/content/short/145/10/999 (accessed february 
28, 2012).

35.  thomas m. burton, medicare faulted on surgery evaluation, the wall street journal, october 18, 2010, at http://online.wsj.com/article/sb100014240527023

03496104575560522424599924.html (accessed february 28, 2012).

36.  groopman, health care: who knows best?
37.  patient protection and affordable care act,  3025.
38.  karen pallarito, high readmission rates may not mean worse hospital care, bloomberg businessweek, july 14, 2010, at http://www.businessweek.com/

lifestyle/content/healthday/641139.html (accessed february 28, 2012).

39.  eiran z. gorodeski, randall c. starling, and eugene h. blackstone, are all readmissions bad readmissions? the new england journal of medicine, vol. 363, no. 

3 (july 15, 2010), at http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/nejmc1001882 (accessed february 28, 2012).

40.  pallarito, high readmission rates may not mean worse hospital care.

8

backgrounder | no. 2679
april 12, 2012

are usually able to document and 
defend their reasoning for deviat-
ing from best practices. one study 
assessed the frequency with which 
quality measures were ignored for 
appropriate exceptions and found 
that, of 650 exceptions reported dur-
ing a seven-month period, 93.6 per-
cent were medically appropriate.41

under medicares vbp program, 
physicians will not have the oppor-
tunity to justify deviations from 
established standards. instead, they 
will have to choose between com-
pliance for payment and what they 
consider to be most appropriate for 
the patient.

cherry-picking endangers 

the doctorpatient relationship. 
another significant issue in a system 
that pays providers based on qual-
ity measures is that providers are 
not single-handedly responsible for 
health outcomes. individuals, their 
behavior, and several other fac-
tors can significantly affect health 
outcomes. rewarding or punishing 
providers based on factors beyond 
their control is unfair and threatens 
patient-centered care by altering the 
way physicians interact with patients 
and encouraging them to cherry-
pick patients and treatments that 
will enhance their performance 
score.

the university of manchester 

study showed that this occurred in 
the pay-for-performance programs 

in california and the united 
kingdom.42 the researchers reported 
that physicians expressed resent-
ment about patients who refused to 
comply with their advice and that 
interviews contained reports of 
seriously dysfunctional or coercive 
behavior by doctors when patients 
were noncompliant. in extreme cases, 
doctors threatened to un-enroll 
patients, accused them of hurting 
their ratings, or lied about the con-
sequences for failing to comply with 
their orders. physicians even report-
ed disregarding informed-consent 
procedures to meet screening targets 
for certain diseases.

another study reinforces the 

fact that patients, not just the care 
they receive, can drastically change 
performance ratings.43 primary-
care physicians who ranked high-
est according to widely used mea-
sures generally attended to older 
patients with more complex illnesses. 
compared to the lowest-ranked phy-
sicians, those physicians also treated 
fewer minority patients, non-english 
speakers, and patients covered by 
medicaid or what the authors cat-
egorize as underinsured. when the 
researchers adjusted the ranking 
system to account for these factors, 
36 percent of primary-care physi-
cians were reclassified.

pay-for-performance programs 

could encourage providers to cherry-
pick procedures as well, focusing on 

the measured services to the neglect 
of others:

[r]ather than creating a cul-
ture of quality, [pay for perfor-
mance] could lead to distor-
tions in reporting or misplaced 
quality improvement efforts 
driven primarily by bonus 
payments. such developments 
could lead to the unintended 
consequence of hospitals nar-
rowly focusing their interven-
tions at the expense of broadly 
improving care.44

even the ppacas strategy to 

punish hospitals for high readmis-
sion rates is misguided, since it 
focuses incentives on hospitals even 
though they are not responsible for a 
patients care following a discharge. 
reducing readmissions rates is wide-
ly considered to be a goal for health 
care reform, and success requires 
improving care coordination fol-
lowing a hospital stay. evidence 
shows that private plans in medicare 
advantage are already doing a better 
job on several measures of quality, 
including reducing readmissions by 
increasing other types of care after 
an inpatient episode.45

the inevitable bias of quality 

measures. only patients can 
truly and effectively define value 
in the health care system, and any 
attempt to do so by the federal 

41.  stephen d. persell, nancy c. dolan, elisha m. friesema, jason a. thompson, darren kaiser, and david w. baker, frequency of inappropriate medical 

exceptions to quality measures, annals of internal medicine, vol. 152, no. 4 (february 2010), pp. 225231, at http://www.annals.org/content/152/4/225.
abstract (accessed february 28, 2012).

42.  mcdonald and roland, pay for performance in primary care in england and california.
43.  clemens s. hong, steven j. atlas, yuchiao chang, s. v. subramanian, jeffrey m. ashburner, michael j. barry, and richard w. grant, relationship between 

patient panel characteristics and primary care physician clinical performance rankings, journal of the american medical association, vol. 304, no. 10 (2010), 
pp. 11071113, at http://jama.ama-assn.org/content/304/10/1107.abstract (accessed february 28, 2012).

44.  charles n. kahn iii, thomas ault, howard isenstein, lisa potetz, and susan van gelder, snapshot of hospital quality reporting and pay-for-performance 
under medicare, health affairs, vol. 25, no. 1 (2006), pp. 148162, at http://content.healthaffairs.org/cgi/reprint/25/1/148 (accessed february 28, 2012).

45.  kathryn nix, how competition improves quality: the case of medicare advantage, heritage foundation center for policy innovation research summary no. 2, 

january 11, 2012, at http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/2012/01/how-competition-improves-quality-the-case-of-medicare-advantage.

9

backgrounder | no. 2679
april 12, 2012

government is certain to reflect an 
administrations political priorities 
and influence from special interests. 
as some health policy experts point 
out, although the quality measures 
are evidence-based and supported 
by clinical science, collapsing the 
measures into composite scores and 
specifying bonus and penalty formu-
las require policy choices for which 
there is no scientific foundation.46
the practice of medicine inher-
ently requires some level of subjec-
tivity and judgment. because it is an 
imprecise science, it would be impos-
sible, even for the most expert of 
central planners, to remove all gray 
areas from medicine. thus, patients 
and their physicians are best posi-
tioned to make the most reasonable 
decisions.

in 2009, the united states 

preventive services task force 
(uspstf) changed its rating of 
mammography for women between 
the ages of 40 and 49 to not rec-
ommended, intending to signal 
that women in this age bracket 
should determine with their doctors 
whether they should receive routine 
screening.47 if such a recommenda-
tion were made a requirement, this 
intent would be ignored. physicians 
kerianne quanstrum and rodney 
hayward explain that:

[s]cientific evidence can only 
help us describe the continuum 
of benefit versus harm. the 

assessment of whether the ben-
efit is great enough to warrant 
the risk of harm  is necessarily 
a value judgment. when either 
side in the mammography wars 
claims that the evidence suggests 
that women should or should not 
undergo routine mammography 
starting at the age of 40 years, 
they are deceiving themselves 
and the public about what the 
evidence can tell us. they are 
really just making different value 
judgments about where to set the 
threshold.48

it would be impossible to remove 
all judgment calls from the practice 
of medicine. the next best option 
is to allow the providers closest to 
each case and the patients affected to 
make the decisions in order to keep 
others prioritiespolitical, budget-
ary, or otherwisefrom shaping their 
outcome.

lawmakers should continue 
to support medicare reform that 
rewards value and does not reduce 
quality of care, but while several 
private health systems have begun 
to use financial incentives to encour-
age adherence to quality measures, 
the federal government is simply 
incapable of replicating the private 
sectors success. when innovations 
prove unsuccessful in the private 
sector, they are simply discontinued, 
while governments need to issue new 
regulations or pass new laws. also, 

in the private sector, physicians who 
go against best practices, as defined 
by cer or other evidence, for the 
unique case of a specific patient 
can often explain their reason-
ing in order to avoid penalties. and 
physicians and patients alike have 
the option of going elsewhere if 
dissatisfied.

impact on  
medical innovation

cer can either serve as a comple-

ment to the creation and introduc-
tion of new treatments or as a strong 
deterrent. which becomes the real-
ity will, again, depend on how the 
research findings are applied to the 
practice of medicine. using cer to 
guide provider payment or make 
coverage decisions would have reper-
cussions extending far beyond the 
bedside. since focusing on existing 
treatments for which data is avail-
able stacks the deck against new ones, 
this reactionary approach would dis-
courage further medical innovation.
the united states is both a major 

producer and consumer of health 
care which means that both demand 
for and supply of medical technology 
is very high. investment in new med-
ical technologies is very high as [are] 
their levels of availability and rate 
of diffusion.49 the u.s. is the largest 
producer of medical technology in 
the world due to this unique demand 
for health care advancements and a 
welcoming environment where the 

46.  kahn et al., snapshot of hospital quality reporting and pay-for-performance under medicare, p. 160.
47.  the senate later agreed to prohibit the use of this specific recommendation from the uspstf in its determination of required free preventive services under 
the affordable care act. see david m. herszenhorn, senate blocks use of new mammogram guidelines, the new york times, december 3, 2009, at http://
prescriptions.blogs.nytimes.com/2009/12/03/gop-amendments-aim-at-new-cancer-guidelines (accessed april 4, 2012).

48.  kerianne h. quanstrum and rodney a. hayward, lessons from the mammography wars, the new england journal of medicine, vol. 363 (september 9, 2010), 

p. 1077, at http://healthpolicyandreform.nejm.org/?p=12525 (accessed february 28, 2012).

49.  meir p. pugatch and helen davison, a healthy market: health technology assessment in context, stockholm network paper on health technology 
assessment no. 2, july 2007, p. 13, at http://www.stockholm-network.org/downloads/publications/health_technology_assessment_in_context.pdf 
(accessed february 28, 2012).

10

backgrounder | no. 2679
april 12, 2012

public sector invests in research and 
private-sector talent leads to the 
development of new technology.50
however, experts warn that the 
nations gradual move toward poli-
cies of top-down cost containment in 
health care spending could jeopar-
dize the countrys ability to produce 
new treatments and make them 
available to patients.51 cleveland 
clinic chief executive toby cosgrove 
states that if we only pay for one of 
those, we begin to limit what people 
are willing to do in terms of develop-
ing new products.52 research shows 
that cer could reduce investment in 
research and development of medical 
technology by $10 billionapproxi-
mately 10 percent to 12 percenteach 
year.53

the impact of cer on personal-
ized medicine, which includes the 
identification and use of a diseases 
genetic origins to indicate the cor-
rect treatment or medication dosage, 
is especially worrisome. advances 
in this area already affect patients 
with lung, colon, or breast cancer and 
hold great potential for other areas 
of medicine. according to a lewin 
group study:

[t]he absence of [personalized 
medicine] considerations in cer 
could be suboptimal for patient 
interests, particularly to the 
extent that cer findings are 
used to support gatekeeping or 

other authoritative functions, 
such as product labeling, clini-
cal practice guidelines, coverage 
policies, and quality measures 
and criteria.54

personalized medicine could 

replace the widely used trial-and-
error treatment paradigm, improve 
health outcomes, and reduce health 
care spending. currently, most phy-
sicians choose a treatment that is 
most likely to be effective and then 
try another if the first is not suc-
cessful. this is costly and clearly not 
ideal for the patient. however, the 
problem might not be that the first 
treatment was ineffective, but that it 
was not effective for all patients. cer 
might discourage the option that 
is effective less often when what is 
really needed is information reveal-
ing for which patients it is effective 
and how to identify them.

if employed correctly, cer does 
not have to pose a threat to innova-
tion. it could, in fact, complement 
personalized medicine by illuminat-
ing areas in which differing respons-
es are due to genetic differences.

researchers robert epstein and 

j. russell teagarden highlight an 
example in which cer compared 
two statin treatments used to lower 
cholesterol in high-risk cardiovascu-
lar patients. the findings supported 
the conclusion that the stronger dose 
of statins lowered the risk of adverse 

outcomes. but that was not the entire 
story. later genetic analysis revealed 
that the stronger treatment held no 
added benefit unless a patient carried 
a particular gene variant.55 while 
cer on its own might have conclud-
ed that the higher dose was better, 
more in-depth research revealed that 
this was not the case.

what congress should do

regrettably, the ppaca puts cer 

use on the wrong path. allowing 
unelected officials to determine how 
and to whom resources are allocated 
rather than empowering doctors 
and patients to make decisions is the 
wrong approach. though the ppaca 
may not immediately result in overt 
rationing of care, its changes in 
medicare open the door to top-down 
use of cer and interference with the 
care seniors receive.

as medicare spending rises, 

pcori and the research it produces 
will increasingly be considered a 
viable resource to micromanage the 
practice of medicine, and the ppaca 
creates the machinery to make this 
happen. for these reasons, the step 
forward should be to repeal the law 
and start over.

the alternative is not to dis-

courage the development of cer, 
since research findings can posi-
tively influence treatment deci-
sions. instead, after fully repeal-
ing the ppaca, congress should 

50.  battelle technology partnership practice, gone tomorrow? a call to promote medical innovation, create jobs, and find cures in america, june 10, 2010, at 

http://www.americanmedicalinnovation.org/sites/default/files/gone_tomorrow.pdf (accessed february 28, 2012).

51.  pugatch and davison, a healthy market, p. 14.
52.  diana suchetka, cleveland clinic ceo toby cosgrove talks about health-care reform and more at city club, cleveland.com, august 19, 2010, at http://

www.cleveland.com/healthfit/index.ssf/2010/08/cleveland_clinic_ceo_toby_cosg.html (accessed february 28, 2012).

53.  benjamin zycher, comparative effectiveness reviews: quantitative analysis of research and development investment effects, pacific research institute, 

july 15, 2011, at http://www.pacificresearch.org/doclib/20110715_zycher_cer_f.pdf (accesses february 28, 2012).

54.  clifford goodman, comparative effectiveness research and personalized medicine: from contradiction to synergy, the lewin group, october 2009, p. 22, 

at http://www.lewin.com/publications/publication/386/ (accessed february 28, 2012).

55.  robert epstein and j. russell teagarden, comparative effectiveness and personalized medicine: evolving together or apart? health affairs, vol. 29, no. 10 

(october 2010), at http://content.healthaffairs.org/cgi/content/abstract/29/10/1783 (accessed february 28, 2012).

11

backgrounder | no. 2679
april 12, 2012

focus on transforming the failing 
medicare program to avoid bureau-
cratic intrusion into patient care, for 
which cer is a tool, not the source. 
transitioning seniors health ben-
efits to a premium support system 
like that included in the heritage 
foundations saving the american 
dream budget reform proposal 
would not only make the program 
solvent, but also prevent further 
central planning and its unwanted 
consequences.56

reform should build on the prov-
en success of the federal employees 
health benefits program, which pro-
vides health coverage to the nations 
8 million federal workers, retirees, 
and their families, and medicare 
part d, which provides seniors with a 
voluntary prescription drug benefit.57 
in both programs, enrollees receive 
a contribution to apply to the private 
plan of their choice and can shop 

around for a better option if costs 
increase or they become otherwise 
dissatisfied. moreover, evidence 
suggests that medicare advantage, 
which offers traditional medicare 
benefits to seniors through a menu of 
private plans, is providing its benefi-
ciaries with a higher quality of care 
than traditional medicare.

conclusion

as patients and consumers, 

americans support the idea of using 
more information to reveal the com-
parative benefits of their treatment 
alternatives. they do not, however, 
favor allowing the government to 
use such information to limit their 
options.58

increased attention to compara-

tive studies of medical interven-
tions can have a positive impact 
on the practice of medicine, but it 
must be limited to assisting doctors 

and patients to determine the right 
course of action. if treated as a bud-
getary constraint, cer will cease 
to be purely informational and will 
have widespread negative effects. 
the ppaca creates the infrastruc-
ture to propel the u.s. health care 
system, and medicare in particular, 
in this flawed direction.

there is no debate over the fact 
that health care resources are lim-
ited and that congress must act to 
reduce runaway health care spend-
ing, but congress must do so with-
out using cer to allow the govern-
ment to micromanage the practice 
of medicine. using research findings 
to strengthen bureaucracy is a losing 
combination that will erode quality 
of care for americans.

kathryn nix is a policy analyst 
in the center for health policy studies 
at the heritage foundation.

56.  stuart m. butler, alison acosta fraser, and william w. beach, eds., saving the american dream: the heritage plan to fix the debt, cut spending, and restore 

prosperity, the heritage foundation, 2011, at http://savingthedream.org.

57.  walton francis, the fehbp as a model for medicare reform: separating fact from fiction, heritage foundation backgrounder no. 1674, august 7, 2003, at 
http://www.heritage.org/research/reports/2003/08/the-fehbp-as-a-model-for-medicare-reform-separating-fact-from-fiction, and kathryn nix, a recipe 
for reform: success of consumer-driven principles in medicare programs, heritage foundation webmemo no. 3340, august 10, 2011, at http://www.heritage.
org/research/reports/2011/08/consumer-driven-medicare-reform-models-for-success.

58.  alan s. gerber, eric m. patashnik, david doherty, and conor dowling, the public wants information, not board mandates, from comparative effectiveness 

research, health affairs, vol. 29, no. 10 (october 2010), pp. 18741875, at http://content.healthaffairs.org/cgi/content/abstract/29/10/1872 (accessed 
february 28, 2012).

12

