immigration policy and  agriculture: possible directions  for the future  philip martin  university of california, davis  executive summary presidential candidate trump in 2016 promised to prevent unauthorized  migration and deport unauthorized foreigners in the united states, and  president  trump  issued  executive  orders  after  taking  office  in  january  2017 that could lead to a 2,000-mile wall on the mexico-us border and the  removal of many of the 11 million unauthorized foreigners, including one  million who work in us agriculture.
this paper emphasizes that, especially  agriculture in the western united states, has long relied on newcomers  to  fill  seasonal  farm  jobs.


the  slowdown  in  mexico-us  migration  since  2008-09  means  that  there  are  fewer  flexible  newcomers  to  supplement  the  current  workforce,  which  is  aging  and  settled.
farm  employers  are  responding by offering bonuses to satisfy current workers, stretching them  with productivity-increasing tools, substituting machines for workers, and  supplementing current workforces with legal h-2a guest workers.


immigration policy will influence the choice between mechanization, guest  workers, and imports.
several factors suggest that the united states may  be  poised  to  embark  on  another  large-scale  guest  worker  program  for  agriculture.


if  it  does,  farmers  should  begin  to  pay  social  security  and  unemployment insurance (ui) taxes on the wages of h-2a workers to foster  mechanization and development in the workers communities of origin by  dividing these payroll taxes equally between workers as they depart and  commodity-specific boards.
worker departure bonuses could be matched  by  governments  in  migrant-sending  areas  to  promote  development,  and  commodity-specific  boards  could  spend  monies  to  reduce  dependence  on  hand labor over time.


the economic incentives provided by payroll taxes  could help to usher in a new and better era of farm labor.
immigration and unauthorized foreigners the united states is the country of immigration, with 20 percent of the worlds international  migrants and perhaps half of the unauthorized foreigners in industrial countries.


the 43  million foreign-born us residents in 2014 were almost one-seventh of the 320 million  americans (brown and stepler 2016).
half of these migrants were hispanic, including  28 percent who were born in mexico and five percent each born in china, india, and the    2017 by the center for migration studies of new york.


all rights reserved.
jmhs volume 5 number 2 (2017): 252-262philippines (ibid.


).
a quarter of the residents of california and new york are migrants  (ibid.


).
miami is over half migrants, and los angeles has 40 percent migrants among its  residents (ibid.


).
a quarter of migrants, some 11 million, are unauthorized, and their fate has been intensively  debated for more than a decade.


the number of unauthorized foreigners rose rapidly in the  late 1990s and again after recovery from the 2000-01 recession, peaking at over 12 million  in 2007, and declining since (passel and cohn 2016a).
about 55 percent of unauthorized  foreigners are mexicans (ibid.


).
figure  1.


unauthorized  foreigners  and  workers  in  the  us, 1990-2014 (mils)  source: pew research center.
some eight million unauthorized foreigners were in the us labor force in 2014, comprising  five  percent  of  the  160  million-strong  workforce  that  also  includes  20  million  lawful  foreign-born workers (passel and cohn 2016b).


the number of unauthorized foreigners  fell nine percent since its peak in 2007, while the number of unauthorized workers fell  four percent, suggesting that mostly non-workers left the united states during and after the  2008-09 recession (ibid.
).


workers can be categorized by industry or occupation.
using national household survey  data,  passel  and  cohn  (2016b)  estimated  that  17  percent  of  those  employed  in  the  agriculture  industry  were  unauthorized  in  2014,  followed  by  13  percent  unauthorized  workers in construction and nine percent in hospitality.


by occupation, 26 percent of those  with farming occupations were unauthorized, followed by 15 percent in construction and  nine percent each in production and service occupations (ibid.
).


253  immigration policy and agriculture: possible directions for the futurethe  us  department  of  labors  national agricultural  worker  survey  (naws),  which  interviews workers employed on crop farms, but not h-2a guest workers,1 has found a  higher share of unauthorized workers.
the naws estimated that 70 percent of the 1.


8  million workers employed sometime during a typical year on crop farms were born in  mexico, and that 70 percent of foreign-born crop workers are unauthorized, so that half  of us crop workers are unauthorized (dol 2017).
there are no statistical data on the  characteristics of the estimated 700,000 workers employed on livestock farms, but they  too are believed to include many mexican-born and unauthorized (rural migration news  2011).


these  data  suggest  that  if  new  enforcement  measures  slow  the  entry  of  unauthorized  foreigners and remove those in the united states, us agriculture could be among the first  industries to be affected.
agriculture has faced labor supply crises in the past, and usually  responded with a combination of labor-saving mechanization and a new source of foreign  workers.


newcomers and seasonal farm jobs the  united  states  developed  three  major  farming  and  farm  labor  systems.
in  most  of  the united states, family farms produced crops and livestock with family workers until  mechanization in the 20th century allowed many farmers to work off the farm and the  remaining farms to become large and specialized.


plantations in the south relied on slaves  and later sharecroppers to produce cotton and tobacco for distant markets, while fruit and  vegetable farms in the west relied on newcomers for whom seasonal agriculture offered  jobs rather than careers (martin 2003, chapter 2).
agriculture  in  the  arid  western  states  evolved  differently.


in  most  of  the  united  states  and in most countries, agricultural development involves the consolidation of small farms  into fewer and larger farms.
in the western states, spanish and mexican land grants and  speculators assembled large tracts, often 50,000 or more acres (the average size of a us  farm is 435 acres).


these large farms were expected to be broken into family-sized units  when the transcontinental railroad was completed in 1869, and falling transportation costs  justified producing dried and canned fruit in the wests mediterranean climate.
these crops  were labor-intensive, and it was thought that only large farm families would be able to  provide the seasonal labor needed to operate small fruit farms successfully (martin 2003,  chapter 2).


however, large farms were not broken up because another source of seasonal labor was  found.
the chinese who had been recruited to build the transcontinental railroad through  the california mountains were driven out of western cities in the 1870s, and many became  migrant and seasonal farmworkers.


economist varden fuller (1991) explained that the low  wages paid to chinese workers who picked fruit were soon capitalized into higher land   1   the h-2a program allows us farmers anticipating labor shortages to have their need for guest workers  certified by the us department of labor and approved by us citizenship and immigration services so that  the us department of state can issue h-2a visas to the foreign workers that employers recruit.
most h-2a  workers can remain in the united states up to 10 months to fill seasonal farm job.


there is no cap on the  number of h-2a visas available (martin 2014).
254  journal on migration and human securityprices, so that aspiring family farmers who arrived on the railroad had to pay high prices  for land but found the value of their own labor equivalent to the low wages paid to chinese  who had no other us job options because of the discrimination they faced in cities.


2 as a  result, relatively few of the southern and eastern europeans who flooded into the united  states between the 1880s and 1914 became family farmers in the western states.
additional chinese were excluded from immigrating in 1882.


as the chinese workforce  aged, state officials warned large farmers that they could not expect white laborers to  spring out of the ground when the chinese influx ceased, and would have to raise wages  and offer year-round work to attract and retain white farmworkers (martin 2003, chapter  2).
farmers found another source of seasonal workers in japan, which legalized emigration  in 1886 (ibid.


).
some japanese workers were able to make the transition from hired hand  to  farmer  by  working  for  a  share  of  the  crop,  gaining  experience  selling  vegetables  to  consumers, and buying marginal farm land.


this unwelcome competition led to a 1907  gentlemens  agreement  that  stopped  japanese  emigration  to  the  united  states  and  prompted  california  to  enact  laws  in  1913  and  1919  to  prohibit  non-us  citizens  from  buying farm land (ibid.
).


3  the  next  newcomers  were  south asian  punjabis,  and  they  were  followed  by  mexican  guest workers between 1917 and 1921 in the first bracero program during world war i  (ibid.
).


filipinos from what was then an american colony were the most important group  of newcomers during 1920s, and dust bowl migrants arrived in the 1930s during one of the  largest internal desperation migrations in us history.
over 1.


3 million people from other  states moved to california during the 1930s, a state with less than six million residents in  1930 (ibid.
).


dust bowl okies and arkies soon dominated the farmwork workforce, the only time in  californias farm labor history that a majority of seasonal workers were white us citizens.
the accessibility of farmworkers in federal farm labor camps led to reports that condemned  the system of large farms relying on seasonal workers to appear when needed and then fend  for themselves, including john steinbecks the grapes of wrath.


however, farm labor  reforms were divided between idealists such as economist paul taylor, the husband of  photographer  dorthea  lange  who  wanted  to  turn  farmworkers  into  small  farmers,  and  realists such as carey mcwilliams, whose factories in the fields argued that large farms  dependent on armies of seasonal workers were inevitable in irrigated and labor-intensive  agriculture, but the workers employed on large farms should have the same labor protections  and union organizing rights as nonfarm factory workers (mcwilliams [1939] 2000).
divided farm labor reformers and the exigencies of world war ii allowed farm employers  to  persuade  the  us  government  to  permit  the  recruitment  of  mexican  braceros  again.


during world war ii, fewer than 75,000 a year entered the united states, but in the mid- 1950s, the number of braceros increased to over 450,000 a year (martin 2003, chapter 2).
a government study in 1959 concluded that the availability of braceros held down farm   2   fuller (1991, vii) noted that large fruit farmers had become accustomed to chinese workers: with no  particular effort on the part of the employer, a farm labor force would emerge when needed, do its work, and  then disappear  accepting the terms and conditions offered, without question.


3   these state laws prompted many issei, or first-generation japanese immigrants, to naturalize or to buy  farmland in the names of their us-born and thus us-citizen children, the nisei.
255  immigration policy and agriculture: possible directions for the futurewages and encouraged mexican-americans to move from agricultural areas to cities where  they did not face competition from braceros (rural migration news 2003).


the bracero program was ended in 1964.
unions and churches argued that the bracero  program was a government policy that slowed the upward mobility of mexican americans,  just as government-sanctioned discrimination held back blacks.


growers countered that  they needed braceros because american workers would not do seasonal farm work, and  that the availability of braceros kept agriculture competitive and food prices low.
in the mid-1960s, farm wages jumped and there was a wave of labor-saving mechanization.


processing tomatoes were rebred to ripen uniformly, and a machine was developed to pick  them in one pass through fields, increasing production, lowering prices to consumers, and  helping to fuel the fast food revolution.
this labor-saving mechanization was controversial,  since government funds were used to displace farmworkers and small farmers (martin and  olmsted 1985).


similarly controversial was the united farm workers (ufw) union, which  won 40 percent wage increases in table grape contracts in 1966 largely because bracero  workers were not available (martin 2003, chapter 2).
unauthorized mexico-us migration began to increase in the late 1970s, as farm employers  turned to labor contractors who recruited rural mexicans to replace ufw workers who  went on strike for higher wages and benefits.


unauthorized mexico-us migration rose  with peso devaluations in the early 1980s and, with no penalties on us employers who  knowingly hired unauthorized workers, their hiring spread to more commodities and areas.
the immigration reform and control act of 1986 (irca) imposed the first federal sanctions  on employers who hired unauthorized workers and legalized over 1.


1 million unauthorized  farmworkers who had completed at least 90 days of farm work in 1985-86.
these now legal  workers spread throughout the united states, and those leaving agriculture were replaced  by unauthorized newcomers from mexico.


the share of unauthorized farmworkers was  less than 10 percent in 1990, after over 1.
1 million unauthorized foreigners were legalized  under the ircas special agricultural worker (saw) program and the unauthorized share  has hovered around 50 percent since the mid-1990s (dol 2017).


immigrants in agriculture today, most hired farmworkers are mexican-born men.
the naws found that the foreign- born share of us crop workers was 55 percent in 1989-90, peaked at 83 percent in 1999-00,  and is now 70 percent (ibid.


).
the remaining 30 percent of crop workers were born in the  united states (ibid.


).
in  1990,  the  crop  workforce  included  35  percent  saw  beneficiaries  and  13  percent  unauthorized workers; the rest were us citizens and other legal immigrant workers (ibid.


).
as saws left agriculture, they were replaced by unauthorized workers, so that there were  fewer than 20 percent saws and more than 50 percent unauthorized in the mid-1990s  (ibid.


).
today, the share of saws has stabilized at 10 percent, another 10 percent of crop  workers are legal via family unification visas or another route, 30 percent are us citizens,  and half are unauthorized (ibid.


).
256  journal on migration and human securityfigure  2.


saws  and  unauthorized  crop  workers,  1989- 2014  saws and unauthorized crop workers, 1989-2014  60%  50%  40%  30%  20%  10%  0%  saws unauthorized  source: national  agricultural  worker  survey  source: pew research center.
the commission on agricultural workers reported that, before irca introduced sanctions  on  employers  who  knowingly  hired  unauthorized  workers  in  1986,  such  workers  were  concentrated  on  fruit-growing  operations  in  california  and  texas  and  in  farm  labor  contractor crews that pruned, hoed, and performed other seasonal tasks on western farms  (caw 1992).


the distribution of unauthorized workers before irca reflected the risk of  producer losses if the border patrol removed them during inspections.
there was a higher  share of unauthorized workers in winter citrus pre-irca because oranges can remain on  trees for several weeks if necessary until new workers are recruited, than in more perishable  summer vegetables, where a sudden loss of workers may result in loss of the crop.


irca changed enforcement in agriculture from a people chase to a paper chase.
instead of  the border patrol driving into fields and attempting to apprehend workers who ran away,  irca meant that most workplace enforcement involved audits of the i-9 forms completed  by newly hired workers and their employers.


if suspected unauthorized workers were found  during audits, employers informed them that they needed to provide work authorization  documents or risk termination.
audits ended the sudden the loss of workers associated with  workplace raids, and encouraged even producers of very perishable commodities to risk  hiring unauthorized workers.


in the early 1990s, first saws and then unauthorized workers spread to all commodities  and areas, as pioneers in florida orange groves, north carolina vegetable farms, and mid- western  detasseling  and  fruit-picking  crews  told  friends  and  relatives  of  opportunities.
farmers  benefitted  from  this  network  recruitment,  since  current  workers  brought  only  qualified friends and relatives into crews and trained them.


257  immigration policy and agriculture: possible directions for the futuresince 2000, the share of unauthorized workers has been about 50 percent in all commodities  and areas, according to the naws (dol 2017).
some commodities and areas rely largely on  legal h-2a guest workers, including florida citrus, north carolina tobacco and vegetables,  and new england and washington apples.


trump and agriculture president trump issued three executive orders during his first week in office, setting in  motion  plans  to  build  a  wall  on  the  mexico-us  border,  increase  deportations,  punish  sanctuary cities that refuse to cooperate with the department of homeland security, and  reduce refugee admissions.
the border memo envisions a $21 billion wall and the addition  of 5,000 border patrol agents to the current 21,000.


4 the interior enforcement memo lays out  plans to double the number of immigration and customs enforcement agents from 10,000  to 20,000 and prioritizes the detection and removal of unauthorized foreigners convicted of  us crimes, but makes almost all unauthorized foreigners subject to deportation.
5  the refugee executive order that received the most media attention would ban the entry  of nationals of seven countries: syria, iran, iraq, somalia, sudan, libya and yemen, and  reduce refugee admissions to 50,000 a year.


6 parts of this executive order were blocked by  federal courts, and the order was effectively re-issued with some modifications in march  2017 and blocked again as unconstitutional religious discrimination.
7 trump is expected to  issue more executive orders dealing with workplace enforcement and guest workers.


us agriculture employs a higher share of unauthorized workers than any other industry.
current  farmworkers  are  aging  and  settling,  increasing  worries  about  who  will  replace  those who find nonfarm jobs.


agriculture may serve as the canary in the coal mine to  indicate how industries reliant on unauthorized workers adjust to fewer newcomers and  higher wages.
farmers  are  responding  to  fewer  unauthorized  newcomers  with  4-s  strategies:  satisfy,  stretch,  substitute,  and  supplement.


by  satisfying  current  workers,  employers  hope  to  retain them longer.
most farmers believe that the supply of labor inside us borders is  fixed or inelastic, so that higher wages will not attract more farmworkers and instead will  move them from lower to higher wage farms.


some are offering benefits such as low-cost  health care to employees and their families or end-of-season bonuses to increase the loyalty  of current workers.
some are improving the training of first-level supervisors to reduce  favoritism and harassment.


the  second  strategy  is  to  stretch  the  current  work  force  with  mechanical  aids  and  management changes that increase worker productivity and make farm work easier.
most   4   border security and immigration enforcement improvements, exec.


order no.
13767, 82 fed.


reg.
8793  (jan.


25, 2017).
5   enhancing public safety in the interior of the united states, exec.


order no.
13768, 82 fed.


reg.
8799  (jan.


25, 2017).
6   protecting the nation from foreign terrorist entry into the united states, exec.


order no.
13769, 82 fed.


reg.
8977 (jan.


27, 2017).
7   protecting the nation from foreign terrorist entry into the united states, exec.


order no.
13780, 82 fed.


reg.
13209 (march 6, 2017).


258  journal on migration and human securityfruits and vegetables are over 90 percent water, and hand harvesters spend much of their  time carrying harvested produce down ladders to bins or to the end of rows to receive credit  for their work.
planting dwarf trees means smaller or no ladders and faster picking, and  hydraulic platforms reduce the need to fill 50 to 60 pound bags of apples and oranges from  ladders.


slow-moving conveyor belts that travel ahead of workers who harvest berries,  broccoli, and other vegetables reduce the need to carry harvested produce, making workers  more productive and harvesting jobs more appealing to older workers and women (calvin  and martin 2010).
the  third  strategy  is  substitution  or  replacing  workers  with  machines.


labor-saving  mechanization is the story of agriculture, as the us went from 95 percent of us residents  in agriculture in 1790 to less than two percent today.
the production of the big-five crops   corn, soybeans, wheat, cotton, and rice  has been mechanized.


there has also been  enormous  labor-saving  change  in  livestock  production,  including,  automatic  feeders,  sensors on cattle, and robotic milking systems.
most nuts are harvested mechanically, with  machines shaking almonds and walnuts from trees and catching them or sweeping them  into rows for pick up.


fresh  fruits  and  vegetables  have  defied  mechanization  for  several  reasons.
many  are  fragile, and human hands are gentler than mechanical fingers in picking grapes or peaches.


machines that shake apples or pears from trees damage a higher share of the fruit than hand  harvesters, meaning a smaller share goes to market.
finally, machines are fixed costs and  workers are variable costs: farmers must pay for a $200,000 harvesting machine whether  there are apples to pick or not, while they do not pay wages to workers if storms or disease  destroy the apple crop.


the  three  decades  from  the  1980s  to  2010  may  have  been  an  era  of  mexican  farm  labor abundance that is coming to an end due to tougher us enforcement growth, work  opportunities  in  mexico,  and  likely  a  new  wave  of  labor-saving  mechanization  in  us  agriculture.
machines are being developed to harvest a variety of crops, from apples to  strawberries, but at current wages they are not competitive with hand harvesting.


however,  with labor costs continuing to rise, as suggested by the law that increases the california  minimum wage from $10 an hour in 2016 to $15 by 2022, many private firms are rushing  to develop harvesting machines.
the  fourth  adjustment  to  fewer  unauthorized  newcomers  is  to  supplement  the  current  workforce with h-2a guest workers.


the h-2a program was created in 1952 and was used  primarily by sugarcane growers in florida and apple growers along the east coast until the  mid-1990s, when north carolina tobacco farmers became the largest employers of legal  guest workers (rural migration news 2017).
there is no cap on the number of h-2a visas that can be issued, but farm employers must  obtain certification of their need for h-2a guest workers by satisfying three major criteria  (ibid.


).
first, farmers must try to recruit us workers and provide reasons why any us  worker who applies for a job is not hired.


second, farmers must provide free housing to  h-2a guest workers and out-of-area us workers.
third, farmers must pay us and h-2a  workers a super-minimum wage known as the adverse effect wage rate, which ranged  from $10.


38 to $13.
79 an hour across states in 2017.


259  immigration policy and agriculture: possible directions for the futurethe  h-2a  program  is  expanding,  doubling  over  the  past  decade  to  165,700  farm  jobs  certified by the department of labor in fy 2016 on about 8,300 us farms (ibid.
).


florida  and north carolina are the leading h-2a-using states, accounting for a quarter of all jobs  certified, but washington and california have had the fastest-growth in certifications, with  the number of h-2a jobs certified doubling over the past five years (ibid.
).


since california  and washington account for over 40 percent of us farmworkers, these states are likely  to become the largest farm guest worker states if the h-2a program continues to expand  (ibid.
).


moving forward satisfying  and  stretching  the  current  farm  workforce  are  short-term  strategies  to  get  farmwork  done,  while  labor-saving  substitution  and  supplementing  are  longer-term  strategies.
farmers are grappling with the optimal strategy, which is likely to be determined  by  nonfarm  developments,  including  the  speed  with  which  costs  fall  and  performance  improves for labor-saving machinery, potential changes to trade policy that affect imports,  and changes that make guest workers cheaper or more expensive.


farming labor-intensive commodities requires a great deal of capital, since planting an  acre  of  peaches  or  pears  requires  an  investment  of  $15,000  per  acre  (football  field)  to  generate revenue of $5,000 an acre after a several year wait (agricultural and resource  economics, uc davis 2017).
farmers making such investments need to decide whether  to plant crops whose prices could be affected by imports and whether to invest in housing  to accommodate farmworkers or machines to harvest their crops.


juggling this triangle is  difficult.
the cost of labor-saving machinery is likely to fall and performance to improve,  but early adopters of machines pay high prices and a lock in costs, since the machines must  be paid for even if weather destroys the crop or imports make it uneconomic to pick.


such uncertainty encourages many farmers to advocate for the labor status quo, with guest  workers  replacing  current  workers  who  leave.
many  farmers  delayed  turning  to  guest  workers because of the high cost of building housing in the urban areas where most fresh  fruits and vegetables are grown (almost all of californias fresh fruits and vegetables are  grown in metro counties).


with the cost of new housing for h-2a guest workers $10,000 a  bed or more, many farmers hoped that the guest worker provisions of the border security,  economic  opportunity,  and  immigration  modernization act  of  2013  (s.
744)  would  become law.


8  s.
744  would  have  replaced  the  h-2a  program  with  new  w-3  and  w-4  programs  and  eliminated the need to provide housing for guest workers.


the w-3 program would be like  the current h-2a program and tie a foreign worker to a particular us farm employer and  job for up to three years, while the w-4 at will program resembles the replenishment  agricultural  worker  program  in  irca  that  was  never  implemented.
w-4  visa  holders  would need an initial job offer to enter the united states, but could then float from one  farm employer to another and remain legal so long as they were not unemployed more than  60 days.


minimum wages that would have to be paid to w-3 and w-4 guest workers would  be reduced by $1 to $2 an hour, and farmers would have to provide their w-3 and w-4 guest  8   s.
744, 113th cong (2013).


260  journal on migration and human securityworkers with a housing allowance equivalent to $1 to $2 an hour, depending on the local  cost of housing.
employees would be responsible for finding their own housing.


making it easier to hire guest workers is likely to prolong the age-old quest for another  group of newcomers willing to accept seasonal farm jobs.
if the united states is about to  embark on another era of guest workers for agriculture, a better strategy would be to use  the social security and unemployment insurance taxes that farmers currently do not pay  on the wages of h-2a workers, in order to foster mechanization in the united states and  development in worker sending communities.


farmers and guest workers should participate in the payroll tax system to level the playing  field with other farmworkers.
however, by giving guest workers special social security  numbers and segregating their payroll taxes, the monies collected could be divided to help  farmworkers  and  farmers.


guest  workers  could  receive  refunds  as  they  left  the  united  states, say $1,500 each,9 to promote development in their areas of origin, and these worker  savings could be matched to spur development.
the other half of the monies could be used  by commodity-specific boards to increase the competitiveness of production, so that those  closest to the fields decide whether to spend the money on machines, housing for guest  workers, or something else.


transforming a farm labor system that has depended on, in the words of varden fuller,  poverty  at  home  and  misery  abroad  to  provide  a  willing  supply  of  newcomers  to  the  seasonal farmwork workforce, is not easy (fuller 1991).
regulatory changes alone have not  transformed the farm labor system, and more tinkering promises a temporary fix followed  by another labor supply crisis in the future.


introducing economic incentives to transform  both worker areas of origin and methods of production in the united states could be the  policy that helps to usher in a new era in farm labor.


