legalization programs and the  integration of unauthorized  immigrants: a comparison of s.
744  and irca   mara e.


enchautegui urban institute   executive summary experiences  under  the  immigration  reform  and  control  act  of  1986  (irca)  may  prove  to  be  a  poor  guide  for  understanding  how  smoothly  todays unauthorized immigrants will integrate into the economy under  reform proposals such as the border security, economic opportunity, and  immigration modernization act (s.
744).


while irca provided a relatively  quick path to legal permanent resident status, s.
744 proposes a decade- long process with much attendant uncertainty.


this and other provisions in  s.
744 may adversely affect immigrants integration and economic mobility.


the  legalization  of  undocumented  immigrants  is  one  of  the  most  contentious  issues  in  immigration reform discussions.
one proposal emblematic of these discussions is contained  in  the  border  security,  economic  opportunity,  and  immigration  modernization  act,  passed by the senate in june 2013 (s.


744).
if this bill were to become law, unauthorized  immigrants would be placed on a 10-year pathway to legalization with citizenship three  years  after  that.


in  1986,  the  immigration  reform  and  control act  (irca)  provided  a  pathway to legalization and citizenship to unauthorized immigrants.
irca was the first and  most comprehensive legislation to address the issue of unauthorized immigration in the  united states, with 2.


7 million immigrants becoming legal residents under it (kerwin 2010).
not surprisingly, irca is commonly used as a point of reference in current immigration  reform discussions.


research on the potential economic and fiscal effects of the legalization provision of s.
744 draws heavily from the 1986 irca experience, particularly concerning the expected  earnings growth and occupational mobility of the would-be legalized.


earnings growth and  upward occupational mobility mean larger benefits for immigrant families as well as larger  benefits for the economy, larger tax revenues, and less reliance on government programs  (enchautegui et al.
2013; institute of taxation 2013; lynch and oakford 2013; kossoudji   and cobb-clark 2002).


the irca experience can be used as a guide to the effects of the   reproduced with permission of the urban institute.
jmhs volume 2 number 1 (2014): 1-13proposed legalization program and has been used in several estimates of economic effects  of legalization (enchautegui et al.


2013).
but there are important differences between irca  and current proposals that impinge on the economic mobility of the would-be legalized.


this brief seeks to discern what features in legalization proposals enhance or hinder the  economic contribution and integration of unauthorized immigrants.
considering irca and  the legalization proposal contained in s.


744 as emblematic of legalization programs, this  brief examines differences between the two, specifically focusing on both the economic  gains of legalization and the integration of immigrants.
other legalization proposals may  emerge as immigration discussions continue.


by comparing irca and s.
744, this brief  aims to  identify program features that could be used by policy makers and interest groups  alike in crafting future legalization proposals for unauthorized immigrants.


the  quick  pathway  to  legal  permanent  residence  in  irca  contrasts  with  the  long  and  uncertain  pathways  proposed  in  s.
744.


this  brief  contends  that  long  and  uncertain  pathways to lawful permanent residence, renewals of temporary status, participation of  employers in adjustments and certifications, and limits to occupational mobilityall of  which are present in s.
744are hurdles to the economic mobility and contributions of the  prospective legalized population.


this brief also argues that because immigration reform  bills contain many elements that affect the integration of immigrants, such bills should  be  conceptualized  as  not  only  immigration  policy  changes  but  also  integration  policy  interventions.
certainly, times have changed and irca had its share of problems.


1 this brief contends  not that a program resembling irca should be implemented currently, but that some of  the provisions of s.
744 not present in irca could be improved to foster the economic  integration  of  the  would-be  legalized  and  enhance  the  fiscal  and  economic  effects  of  legalization.


looking back, ircas quick pathway to permanent residence was not only  major immigration policy legislation but also a major immigrant integration policy.
as s.


744 has not yet being passed by congress and the nation continues to debate immigration  reform, conceptualizing immigration reform bills not only as immigration policy changes  but immigrant integration policies can help guide the design of legalization programs.
a  comparison  of  irca  and  s.


744  pathways  to  legal  permanent residence and citizenship the main legalization features of irca and s.
744 are listed in tables 1, 2, and 3.


the  information on the table focuses on only the most important legalization stipulations and is  not exhaustive.
for example, it does not list provisions related to fees, absences from the  united states, criminal record, and the filing of a complete application.


table  1  shows  ircas  and  s.
744s  stipulations  to  qualify  for  temporary  status.


irca   1  some of commonly discussed problems included fraud in the special agricultural program, the creation  of  mixed-status  families  through  the  absence  of  derivatives  benefits,  gender  bias  in  documentation  requirements and a lack of attention to future immigration flows (cooper and oneal 2005; baker 1997;  hagan  and  baker  1993;  virtue,  paul.
statement  before  the  subcommittee  on  immigration  and  claims.


designations of temporary protected status and fraud in prior amnesty programs.
hearing, march 4, 1999.


2  journal on migration and human securitycontained  two  major  programs:  one  for  general  unauthorized  immigrants  and  one  for  agricultural  workers.
2  in  irca,  general  unauthorized  immigrants  who  qualified  were  granted temporary status if they had arrived in united states before january 1, 1982.


under  the special agricultural worker (saw) program, agricultural workers must have performed  agricultural work for at least 90 days in the 12 month period ending on may 1, 1986 to  qualify.
temporary status was not extended to spouses and children of petitioners.


s.
744  also  distinguishes  between  general  and  agricultural  immigrants.


general  unauthorized  immigrants requesting registered provisional immigrant (rpi) status must have arrived by  december 31, 2011.
the blue card program is for certain agricultural workers.


to obtain a  blue card, agricultural workers must have performed 575 hours or 100 days of agricultural  work during the two-year period ending on december 31, 2012.
both programs extend  temporary status to spouses and children residing in the united states by december 31,  2012.


table  2  shows  the  legislations  stipulations  during  temporary  status.
under  irca,  the  temporary status could last up to 31 months for general applicants, or one to two years in the  case of agricultural workers.


during the first five years after temporary status was granted,  the legalized could not receive means-tested federal benefits.
3 there was no renewal of  temporary status.


in s.
744, temporary status could last up to 12 years for rpis and up to 8  years for blue card immigrants.


after 6 years, rpis must renew their temporary status.
to  renew, rpis need to have income levels no less than the poverty threshold and will have  to show proof either of continuous employment without interruptions lasting more than 6  months or of ongoing education.


employers of blue card holders have to submit yearly  reports to the department of agriculture about the employment of blue card immigrants  during  their  temporary  status.
neither  rpis  nor  blue  card  immigrants  are  eligible  to  receive means-tested federal benefits or subsidies for buying health care insurance in the  exchanges in the affordable care act.


table  3  shows  the  legislations  stipulations  to  obtain  lawful  permanent  resident  (lpr)  status  and  citizenship.
after  19  months  of  temporary  status,  immigrants  in  the  general  irca program were eligible for lawful permanent residence.


to obtain lawful permanent  residence, temporary immigrants in the general program had to have minimal knowledge  of english, us history, and government, or show that they were pursuing education or  training in these areas.
saws were able to obtain lawful permanent residence within one  to  two  years  after temporary  status  was  granted.


saws  did  not  have  to  show  proof  of  continued agricultural employment after enactment of the law to receive lawful permanent  residence.
irca had neither employment nor income requirements for it.


after 5 years in  lpr status, irca immigrants could become citizens.
in s.


744, the pathway to legalization and citizenship differs significantly from ircas  model.
instead  of  being  rapid  and  clear,  it  is  long  and  uncertain.


under  s.
744,  the  undocumented immigrant will be under rpi status for ten years before they can apply for  lawful permanent residence.


border security and enforcement requirements have to be met   2   two  other  programs  of  smaller  scale  contained  in  irca  were  the  registry  granting  legalization  to  immigrants who arrived to the united states by january 1972 (60,000 applicants) and for cubans and haitians  who arrived before 1982 (cooper and oneil 2005).
3  saws restrictions were specific to the program of aid for families with dependent children.


3  legalization programs and the integration of unauthorized immigrants(also referred to as triggers), but processing of lpr applications must start within 10 years  if these triggers are not met.
after 10 years in rpi status, an application for adjustment to  lpr can be submitted.


however, it is uncertain when these lpr visas will be awarded  because the visa applications of rpis will be the last applications processedthey cannot  be awarded until all visa petitions submitted before the enactment of the law have been  awarded (this is the back of the line provision).
to become lprs, rpis must show a  record of regular employment and show that they are not likely to become a public charge.


agricultural workers with blue cards can obtain lawful permanent residence in five years.
they must show employment in agriculture after enactment of the law.


specifically, a blue  card holder could get lpr status in five years if during the five years since enactment of  the law she or he worked no less than 150 work days in agriculture during each of three  years.
4 blue card holders visa applications are not subject to numerical limitations like  those of rpis.


under s.
744, after 3 years as an lpr, general immigrants can apply for  citizenship.


former blue card holders can become citizens after 5 years as an lpr.
hurdles  to  economic  benefits  and  integration  of  the  legalization proposal of s.


744 many studies draw from irca to infer the benefits of legalization for immigrants and  the  economy  (hinojosa-ojeda  2010;  institute  of  taxation  and  economic  policy  2013;  lynch  and  oakford  2013;  rector  and  richwine  2013).
however,  s.


744s  long  and  bumpy pathway to lpr status for rpis, the promise of a visa in five years with continued  employment in agriculture, and the involvement of employers in the process of renewal  and lpr application can be hurdles to the economic integration of the would-be legalized.
there is a link between legal immigration status and the life chances of immigrants, and  thus between immigration status and integration outcomes (enchautegui 2008; gleeson  2010; jasso 2011; massey 2007; menjivar 2006).


in  comparing  irca  legalization  to  the  legalization  proposal  in  s.
744,  the  following  features could affect the economic contribution and integration of the newly legalized:  	 long	and	uncertain	period	in	temporary	status	is	a	constraint	to	integration: under  irca, most newly legalized were legal permanent residents within two years.


under s.
744, the temporary status period for rpis would be ten years, with renewal within six  years.


blue card holders would be in  temporary status for five years.
admittedly, legal  employment and freedom from the threat of deportation are important to undocumented  workers and their families, offering an improvement over the current law.


but temporary  status is not the same as lawful permanent residence, and the implications for economic  integration are important.
the long period in temporary status, the renewal application  after six years, and the uncertainty of when one would receive an lpr visa (because of  back of the line provisions and border enforcement triggers) all hinder immigrants  economic  integration.


although  the  quantitative  empirical  research  is  scarce,  there  are qualitative studies of central american temporary immigrants in the us, many of  whom have been in temporary status for years, even decades.
these studies find that   4  since the blue card is valid  for up to eight years (table 2), the worker can get lpr status before 8 years if  he/she shows that he/she worked 100 days in each of five years over the last 8 years.


4  journal on migration and human securitytemporary status is ambiguous; it is neither an undocumented status nor a documented  one, but may have the characteristics of both (menjivar 2006, 1008).
menjivar (2006;  2012) and mountz et al.


(2002) describe at length the uncertainties and anxieties of  these  temporary  status  families,  describing  them  as  in  a  legal  limbo.
temporary  status has important effects on immigrants sense both of belonging and of their future  in the united states.


as uriarte et.
al.


(2003, 11) posit in a study of immigrants with  temporary protected status in the boston area, for persons other than u.
s.


permanent  residents, immigration is a reality that must be managed on a daily basis.
because  of the uncertain future it offers, temporary status prevents immigrants from making  investments  both  small  and  large  (mountz  et  al.


2012).
immigrants  visions  for  themselves in the host country are important for investment in their own human capital  and eventual earnings growth (cortes 2004, khan 1997), as well as other investments  that depend on expectations of permanence in the united states (galor and stark 1991).


the	bureaucracy	of	renewal: another important factor in legalization proposals is  how administrative and bureaucratic processes affect the target population.
s.


744s  provisions for the  rpi status renewal process directly affect immigrants economic  opportunities.
according to jasso (2011), immigration office personnel and practices and those offices pervasive problem of lost documentshave significant effects on  the life chances of immigrants.


as a participant in enchautegui and menjivar (2013)  states: any little thing can cause a problem with the immigration [authorities].
even  a form for a change of address, if its not perfect, can throw off your case.


at times,  immigrants hesitate to apply for temporary status renewal, because denial is a clear,  official return to undocumented status, a result many immigrants fear (uriarte et al  2003).
these bureaucratic processes are not unbiased, privileging male immigrants,  educated immigrants, and foreign-born spouses  of  natives (hagan  and baker 1997;  jasso 2011; salcido and menjivar 2012).


s.
744s temporary status renewal process  contains hurdles detrimental to the economic success of the would-be legalized, sending  some back to an undocumented status, delaying renewal for others, and even taking  some immigrants off of the legalization pathway completely.


employers	role	in	the	pathway	to	legalization.
proponents of legalization programs  should  also  be  wary  of  employers  role  in  status  certifications,  renewals,  and  lpr  status applications.


under s.
744, employers would play a direct role in the pathway to  legalization of immigrants.


rpis have to renew their application in 6 years, conditional  on employment and an income at or above the poverty line.
employment is verified  again when applying for lpr status (see table 3).


for blue card immigrants, employers  have to provide a yearly employment status report to the us department of agriculture,  simultaneously providing a copy to the worker.
irca did not have similar employer  involvement for temporary status immigrants.


employer verification for lpr status  can also place workers in an uneasy relationship with their employers.
it is known that  workers in vulnerable  conditions are less likely to come forward to report injuries  and safety, wage or hours violations (bernhardt et al.


2009; de castro et al.
2006).


and while unauthorized immigrants are at extreme vulnerability to these violations  (bernhardt et al.
2009; enchautegui 2008), temporary status workers are also at high  risk (sukthankar 2012; gao 2010).


allowing employers to play a role in legalization  may come at the expense of improved wages and working conditions of the immigrants   5  legalization programs and the integration of unauthorized immigrantsthe program intends to benefit.
family	separation	during	temporary	status: family reunification is a long-standing  principle  of  us  immigration  policy  and  it  encourages  the  social  and  economic  integration  of  immigrants  (enchautegui  2013).


legalization  programs  that  prevent  family  reunification  can  be  detrimental  for  the  well-being  of  immigrants.
under  s.


744,  temporary  immigrants  cannot  petition  visas  for  immediate  family  members  residing abroad.
this is yet another constraint to economic mobility and integration,  especially considering the long duration of the temporary status.


most rpi immigrants  will have to wait at least 10 years to petition for such visas.
this was not the case  in  irca,  because  most  immigrants in  this  program  had  received lawful  permanent  residence within two years of its enactment.


family members play a significant role  in immigrants integration; familial presence expands the availability of resources and  enables economic mobility.
these family members could contribute financially, assist  in business, or support other family members work (baker and benjamin 1997; duleep  and regets 1996; sanders and nee 1996).


the inability to bring family from abroad  also takes an emotional and economic toll on immigrants, especially for mothers and  fathers who send remittances to children and spouses  abroadoften hindering their  own economic well-being (abrego 2009).
locking	immigrants	into	low	paying	jobs: legalization offers formerly undocumented  immigrants the employment mobility to leave unfair or low-paying jobs (kossoudji  and cobb-clark 2002).


legalization proposals that constrain immigrants job mobility  can limit overall economic mobility.
s.


744 promises permanent residence in five years  to blue card agricultural workers who continue such work after enactment of the law,  provided they work no less than 150 work days in agriculture during each of three years  since enactment of the law.
5 irca did not impose agricultural work requirements after  enactment.


it is crucial to note that agricultural jobs are among the lowest-paid jobs in  the united states.
for full-time agricultural workers in 2012, median weekly earnings  were $435, or 56 percent of the weekly earnings of the average worker.


6  poor wages,  seasonal employment, and poor labor conditions push many agricultural workers to  pursue other occupations and to increase the time spent on nonfarm work (taylor and  thilmany 1993; dol 2000; walters et al.
2006).


while the s.
744 agricultural work  requirement is intended to produce a stable and authorized agricultural workforce, it  may  unintentionally  slow  economic  integration  of  legalized  immigrants  by  locking  them at low wage levels.


what does this mean for immigration reform?
immigration reform is one of the most debated policy issues in this country.


central to it  is the question of what to do with over 11 million undocumented immigrants currently   5  since the blue cards are good for up to eight years, the worker can get lpr status before 8 years if he/she  show that worked 100 days each of five years in the last 8 years or 150 days of agricultural work each of three  years during the last five years.
6  data from bureau of labor statistics, household data annual averages, table 39: median weekly earnings  of full-time wage and salary workers by detailed occupation and sex, 2012.


retrieved from http://www.
bls.


gov/cps/cpsaat39.
pdf  6  journal on migration and human securityin the united states (hofer, rytina, and baker 2012; passel and cohn 2012).


because  irca is often used to analyze the economics of a possible legalization program, this brief  compares ircas legalization provisions with those in s.
744, which are emblematic of  current discussions on immigration reform.


the goal is to identify features of legalization  programs that could enhance or hinder the integration of immigrants.
the legalization program in s.


744 is not only a major immigration policy change, but  also a major integration policy intervention.
immigration status is central to the integration  of  immigrants.


it  affects  legal  rights,  ability  to  sponsor  family  members,  and  access  employment,  financial  capital,  and  government  benefits  (enchautegui  and  menjvar  2013).
using s.


744 as a guide and comparing it to irca, this brief points to features in  legalization programs that are hurdles to the economic progress of legalized immigrants.
irca, by allowing a quick pathway from undocumented to legal resident status, was not  only a major immigration policy change but also a major integration policy intervention.


admittedly, s.
744 is better than the current law.


however, because this bill is not yet law  and additional proposals may emerge, there is still an opportunity to discuss a legalization  proposal that would greater encourage the economic integration of the would-be legalized  and increase their contribution to the economy.
a brief period of temporary status is critical for immigrants economic integration.


long  periods in temporary status with no certain outcome, as envisioned in s.
744, would slow  the economic growth of the would-be legalized and thus dampen the economic benefits  of  legalization.


immigration  reform  proposals  could  shorten  this  period  and  curb  the  uncertainty introduced by renewals, back of the line stipulations, and border security  triggers.
reducing the role of employers in immigrants status certifications and adjustment  could yield better jobs for immigrants.


fewer limitations on job mobility and faster family  reunification also contribute to economic integration.
legalization proposals could also  contain strong language enforcing  regulation of wages, hours, and workplace safety.


there is a close link between immigration status and economic achievement (jasso 2011;  massey 2007; menjivar 2006).
stricter immigration laws such as  increased border security  measures,  employment  verification  systems,  improved  tracking  of  nonimmigrants,  and  stronger interior enforcement,  increase the visibility of immigration status, making it a  stronger differentiator in economic achievement.


the temporary statuses proposed as part  of s.
744 could become another layer of economic disparity unless the changes suggested  in this brief are considered.


7  legalization programs and the integration of unauthorized immigrantstable 1.
selected legalization features of irca and  s.


744: receiving temporary status  ircaa  s.
744b  date	of	arrival	for	temporary	status	eligibility	  generalc  entered us before 1/1/1982 (stat.


3394)  agricultural workersd has resided in the us and performed  agricultural work for at least 90 days  in the 12 months period ending on   5/1/1986.
(stat.


3417) temporary status not extended to  spouse and children of the principal.
derivatives	for	temporary	 status  arrived in the us by 12/31/2011  (138) performed 575 hours or 100  days of work during the two-year  period ending 12/31/2012 (242)  temporary status extended to  spouses and children of rpi and  blue card holders in the united  states by 12/31/2012 (144, 242)  employment	requirement	to	obtain	temporary	status  no requirement  general agricultural workers worked in agriculture for at least 90  days in the 12 months period ending  on  5/1/1986 (stat.


3417)  no requirement worked in agriculture 575 hours  or 100 days during the two year- period ending 12/31/2012 (242)  application	period	for	temporary	status  general  during 12 months starting no later  than 180 days after enactment of  the law (stat.
3394)  agricultural workers  during a period of 18 months  beginning on the first day of the 7  month after enactment of the law  (stat.


3417)  trigger: not before the secretary  of homeland security has  submitted to congress the  notice of commencement  of implementation of the  comprehensive southern  border security strategy and the  southern border fencing strategy  (13); applications accepted during 1  year from the publication of the  law; extension of 18 months as  determined by the secretary of  homeland security (147, 148) one year from publication of  the law.


