new models of international  agreement for refugee protection  susan f.
martin1 georgetown university  executive summary in  june  2016,  the  united  nations  high  commissioner  for  refugees  (unhcr) announced that more than 65 million persons have fled conflict  and persecution.


while certainly large in its own right, the number actually  underestimates  displacement  in  todays  world.
many  millions  more  are  displaced each year and cumulatively from a much broader range of life- threatening humanitarian crises than are captured by unhcrs figures.


an average of 26.
4 million were displaced annually by acute natural hazards  since  2008  and  an  unknown but  sizable  number  displaced  by  gang  and  cartel violence, electoral and communal violence, nuclear and industrial  accidents, and a range of other human-made disasters.


this article argues  for new frameworks to more effectively address the situation of the totality  of displaced persons, citing two recent efforts  the nansen initiative and  migrants in countries in crisis initiative  as examples of practical ways  to move forward in this regard.
i.


introduction displacement from humanitarian crises is complex and diverse.
for the purposes of this  article, humanitarian crises are any situations in which there is a widespread threat to life,  physical safety, health, or basic subsistence that is beyond the coping capacity of individuals  and the communities in which they reside (martin et al.


2014).
humanitarian crises may be  triggered by acute events or slow-onset processes, and can unfold naturally, in combination  with anthropogenic factors and/or through human accident or ill will.


hurricanes, cyclones,  tsunamis, earthquakes, epidemics and pandemics, nuclear and industrial accidents, acts of  terrorism,  armed  conflict,  environmental  degradation,  drought,  famine,  climate  change,  situations  of  generalized  violence  and  political  instability,  and  serious  and  pervasive  human rights violations, including persecution and torture, are all potential triggers.
in  most cases, underlying structural factors exacerbate the situation.


poor governance at the  national and local levels, high levels of poverty and inequality, and insufficient access to  basic services undermine coping capacities and make a crisis out of what might otherwise  be a manageable event.
1  the author thanks the john d.


and catherine t.
macarthur foundation for their support of her work on  crisis migration.


2016 by the center for migration studies of new york.
all rights reserved.


jmhs volume 4 number 3 (2016): 60-75the 65 million refugees and displaced persons reported by unhcr in june 2016 represent  only  one  group  of  those  affected  by  humanitarian  crises    those  fleeing  persecution  and conflict (unhcr 2016).
many persons are displaced by other crises that, in some  cases, present equally life-threatening situations.


according to the internal displacement  monitoring center (idmc), more than 19 million people were newly displaced by disasters  brought on by natural hazards in 2015 (idmc 2016).
the 2015 levels were lower than  average;  annual  displacement  from  these  hazards  since  2008  averaged  more  than  21.


5  million per year (ibid.
).


the majority of new displacements from natural hazards are in  asia, primarily from weather events but also from earthquakes, volcanoes, and other geo- physical  disruptions.
india,  china,  and  nepal  registered  the  highest  numbers  of  newly  displaced in 2015, with 3.


7 million, 3.
6 million and 2.


6 million, respectively (ibid.
).


as a  proportion of population, new displacements most heavily affected small island states; for  example, a storm surge in tuvalu uprooted 55 percent of its population of around 10,000  (ibid.
).


while the majority are displaced globally for a short period and then return home,  an increasing number of those fleeing natural hazards are in protracted situations (idmc  2015a), unable to return or to find permanent solutions in other locations.
the only statistics available on movements in the context of acute natural hazards pertain to  internally displaced persons (idps); there are no global and few national statistics on cross- border movements.


although not citing specific numbers, the nansen initiative identified  50 countries that in recent decades have received or refrained from returning people in  the aftermath of disasters, in particular those caused by tropical storms, flooding, drought,  tsunamis, and earthquakes (nansen initiative 2015).
the largest numbers appear to have  been displaced cross-border from somalia to kenya and ethiopia during a drought in 2011  and from haiti to the dominican republic after an earthquake in 2010.


human-made  events  also  cause  large-scale  displacement  both  internally  and  across  borders.
hundreds of thousands have been displaced by gang and cartel violence (e.


g.
,  the estimated 566,700 idps in el salvador, guatemala, and honduras [idmc 2015b]).


similarly, election and communal violence that does not rise to the level of armed conflict  causes displacement (e.
g.


, the more than 600,000 estimated to have been displaced after  the 2007 kenyan elections [adeagbo and iyi 2011]).
although triggered by natural events  (earthquake and tsunami), the 2011 fukushima-daiichi nuclear accident in japan displaced  more than 150,000 people, many of whom remain displaced (iom 2015).


the earlier nuclear  accident in chernobyl also displaced thousands of people (meybatyan 2014).
at the time,  the displacement was internal to the soviet union; had it occurred after the dissolution  of the soviet union, it would have involved considerable cross-border movements from  chernobyl, which was close to the borders between ukraine, russia, and belarus.


at  the  nexus  of  natural  and  human-made  causes  are  the  slow-onset  environmental  disruptions  related  to  climate  change.
according  to  the  fifth  assessment  report  of  the  intergovernmental panel on climate change, [c]limate change over the 21st century is  projected to increase displacement of people (ipcc 2014, 20).


the detailed review of  the evidence indicated that [e]xtreme weather events provide the most direct pathway  from climate change to migration (adger et al.
2014, 767), but also noted that in the  longer-term sea level rise, coastal erosion, and loss of agricultural productivity  will  have a significant impact on migration flows (adger et al.


2014, 768-69).
while some   61  new models of international agreementof these movements precipitated by worsening environmental conditions are likely to be  voluntarily  planned  by  individuals  and  households,  others  will  be  clearly  involuntary,  including relocations planned by governments.


perhaps most at risk will be those who are  unable to move on their own because of age, infirmity, or lack of financial, social or human  resources, and who become trapped in increasingly more dangerous situations.
ii.


challenges  in general, the legal, policy, and institutional frameworks for protecting those who are  displaced by humanitarian crises are woefully inadequate.
remedying the inadequacies  of these frameworks presents great challenges to the international community.


protections  afforded to those who are displaced by humanitarian crises should include physical and  legal  safeguards  as  well  as  access  to  humanitarian  assistance  and  durable  solutions.
generally, however, the extent to which those who move in the context of humanitarian  crises have access to protection under existing frameworks is affected and often limited by  the specific causal factors that precipitate movement and whether affected populations cross  international borders or remain within their own countries.


not surprisingly, in light of the  holocaust and emerging cold war, in creating the office of the unhcr and promulgating  the 1951 convention relating to the status of refugees (hereinafter referred to as the 1951  convention),  the  international  community  gave  special  consideration  to  those  fleeing  persecution (martin 2014).
soon thereafter, however, unhcr was repeatedly asked to  use its good offices to provide protection to those fleeing armed conflict.


while the 1951  convention remained focused on persecution, in 1969, recognizing the inadequacy of the  1951 convention in addressing displacement in africa, the organization of african unity  (now the african union) adopted a regional convention that defined refugees to include  persons compelled to leave because of external aggression, occupation, foreign domination,  or events seriously disturbing public order.
in 1984, the latin american countries adopted  a similar definition in the cartagena declaration.


victims of other types of humanitarian  crises, however, still fall outside these commendable regional expansions of the refugee  definition.
geopolitical developments affect and have affected responses as well.


throughout the cold  war, the principal focus of the international community was the protection of those who  were displaced across international borders.
many of those who were treated as refugees had  fled communist countries or were displaced by superpower proxy conflicts.


the end of the  cold war and subsequent interventions increased the visibility of persons forcibly uprooted  within country borders because of armed conflict, internal strife, and systematic violations  of human rights.
in 1998, guiding principles on internal displacement were promulgated by  the special representative of the secretary-general.


although not binding international law,  the world summit in new york in september 2005 recognized the guiding principles as  an important international framework for the protection of internally displaced persons.
2  unlike the 1951 refugee convention, the guiding principles apply to persons displaced  by a wide range of events, including armed conflict, situations of generalized violence,  violations  of  human  rights  or  natural  or  human-made  disasters  (ocha  2004,  12)  in   2   un general assembly, resolution 60/1, 2005 world summit outcome, october 24, 2005, http://www.


un.org/womenwatch/ods/a-res-60-1-e.
pdf.


62  journal on migration and human security2005, unhcr agreed to lead the un cluster responsible for protection of idps in conflict  situations; no single un agency has responsibility for protection in other crises.
this  patchwork  of  conventions  and  institutional  mandates  has  proven  to  be  highly  ineffective in providing protection to those displaced by todays humanitarian crises.


even  the long-standing refugee regime is facing major challenges in light of the multiple crises  in the middle east, africa, and mostly recently europe that have led to the highest levels  of displacement recorded by unhcr.
a linchpin of the refugee system  burden sharing   appears to be withering just when most needed.


some members of the european union  refused to accept asylum seekers; financial support for refugees had reached dangerously  low levels in the middle east, necessitating large cuts in food rations for syrian refugees  in fall 2015 (before the eu stepped up its funding in the hopes of curtailing outmigration);  and few countries pledged significant levels of refugee resettlement  even traditional  resettlement  countries  like  the  united  states,  in  which  resettlement  became  a  heated  political issue.
a further challenge to todays handling of displacement relates to the length of average  crises and the displacement they produce.


much of the existing system for protecting and  assisting refugees and displaced persons was designed to meet short-term emergency needs,  not  long-term  ones.
yet,  crises  that  produce  refugees  and  displaced  persons  generally  persist for years, often decades (ferris 2011; loescher and milner 2004).


increasingly,  even natural hazards are creating conditions that make it difficult if not impossible for  people to return home quickly or ever.
this trend is likely to accelerate as climate change  renders larger areas uninhabitable or undermines traditional livelihoods.


as these situations  become more and more protracted, new sets of challenges emerge  not least, finding  durable solutions to avoid the type of intergenerational displacement that has become too  familiar in too many locations.
treating 30 year crises as ongoing emergencies renders  the refugees and displaced persons dependent on continuing humanitarian aid and deprives  them of the opportunity to establish new livelihoods and resume normal lives.


the  multiplicity  of  legal  statuses  of  those  affected  by  humanitarian  crises  presents  challenges as well.
globally, the majority of the affected populations are citizens of the  countries in which the crisis occurs.


if they are displaced within their own borders, they are  internally displaced, but if they cross international borders, they may be granted refugee  status, temporary protected status, or be treated as irregular migrants.
within the countries  in crisis, there also may be non-nationals and stateless persons who are endangered.


the  non-nationals also include persons with multiple statuses  tourists, business travelers,  foreign  students,  temporary  workers,  irregular  migrants,  permanent  residents,  asylum  seekers  and  refugees,  to  name  a  few.
depending  on  the  status  of  the  affected  persons,  they may be eligible for a range of different services and benefit from different levels of  protection during the crisis.


iii.
the way forward it is time for a fundamental rethinking of the ways in which countries respond to large- scale  displacement  from  all  life-threatening  events,  regardless  of  location.


the  world  humanitarian summit (whs), which took place in istanbul in may 2016, provided an   63  new models of international agreementopportunity  to  reconsider  the  entire  international  response  to  these  situations  of  mass  displacement.
an initiative of un secretary-general ban ki-moon, the summit brought  together governments, humanitarian organizations, people affected by humanitarian crises,  and the private sector to propose solutions to our most pressing challenges and set an  agenda to keep humanitarian action fit for the future (ocha 2016).


the summit had four  principal themes: humanitarian effectiveness, reducing vulnerability and managing risk,  transformation through innovation, and serving the needs of people in conflict.
all four  apply to refugees and displaced persons, although the fourth is most pertinent as conflict is  the backdrop for most displacement.


the chairs report summarized the conclusions of the  conference pertaining to displacement:  participants resolved to pursue a new approach to address the needs of internally  displaced persons and refugees that would meet immediate humanitarian needs  and longer-term development outcomes to enhance the self-reliance of refugees,  internally displaced persons (idps) and host communities displacement in the  context of disasters and climate change was also recognized as a growing threat.
a  number of participants called for the development of an international mechanism  and legal framework for the protection of people displaced by the adverse impacts  of climate change.


a platform on disaster displacement [successor to the nansen  initiative] was also launched.
(emphasis in original; un secretary-general 2016c, 5) the  secretary-generals  report  to  the  whs  offered  concrete  objectives  regarding  displacement, including a shift from delivering increasing annual amounts of short-term  assistance to displaced people towards an approach that seeks to reduce displacement and  strengthen the self-reliance of internally displaced persons over three to five years through  returns,  integrations  or  resettlement  (un  secretary-general  2016b).


the  high-level  panel on humanitarian financing recommended that the whs establish an international  solidarity levy mechanism to support the health welfare of displaced people (high-level  panel 2015).
less than one month from now, on september 19, 2016, another un high-level meeting  will focus more specifically on large movements of migrants and refugees, spurred largely  by the multiple crises that have led to mass movements throughout the world.


it appears  that this meeting will not address the situation of internally displaced persons in any detail,  aiming instead to bring attention to cross border movements.
the secretary-generals report  describes the challenge:   large  movements  of  people  will  continue  or  possibly  increase  as  a  result  of  violent conflict, poverty, inequality, climate change, disasters, and environmental  degradation.


despite valiant efforts, our responses have too often been inadequate.
we  have  provided  life-saving  assistance,  but  have  been  unable  to  plan  for  the  eventuality of longer-term displacement or to sufficiently support host communities.


(un secretary-general 2016a, 2)  64  journal on migration and human securitythe report went on to discuss four principal goals of the meeting:  we must find ways to govern our national borders effectively, while protecting  the human rights of all refugees and migrants.
we need to address the causes of  displacement and irregular migration.


we must develop mechanisms to respond  to future large movements of people more effectively and predictably.
we must  acknowledge and strengthen the contributions that refugees and migrants make to  host communities.


(ibid.
, 3) among the problems to be addressed, the report raised the gaps in protection referenced  herein:  despite the gradual expansion of refugee protection there are many people who are  compelled to leave their homes for reasons that do not fall within the conventions  refugee definition, including disasters or the erosion of livelihoods due to adverse  impacts of climate change and food insecurity.


many use migration channels to  seek safety and many countries allow people who have left their countries for these  and other reasons to remain under temporary measures.
(ibid.


, 6) the secretary-general recommended adoption at the upcoming summit of two measures to  foster greater solidarity: a global compact on responsibility-sharing for refugees and a  global compact for safe, regular, and orderly migration.
the draft outcome document  released in august 2016 defers the adoption of these compacts until 2018.


in the meantime,  the referenced gaps in current protection would be addressed through other mechanisms,  largely state-led, ad hoc, informal initiatives aimed at addressing the situation of specific  populations at risk: the nansen initiative, the migrants in countries in crisis (micic)  initiative  each of which is discussed at length in section iv  and a yet-to-be-established  initiative to improve protection and assistance for migrants in vulnerable situations.
iv.


state-owned processes to improve protection bottom-up, state-led consultative processes with multi-stakeholder involvement  such as  the nansen initiative and micic  have become the norm in addressing protection gaps  in displacement.
substantively, these state-led efforts resemble the soft-law approach of  the guiding principles on internal displacement, as they seek to incorporate well-ratified  international  norms  into  a  set  of  non-binding  but  persuasive  guidance.


procedurally,  however, they differ from the guiding principles on internal displacement, which were  launched by the special representative of the secretary-general and presented to the un  commission on human rights.
whereas the guiding principles were later endorsed by  governments (at the 2005 world summit), states often pointed out that they had not been  engaged in their formulation.


the concept for the nansen initiative and micic is modeled,  in  part,  on  the  success  of  the  global  forum  on  migration  and  development  (gfmd),  which emerged from the 2006 high-level dialogue on migration and development in  the un general assembly.
the gfmd is a state-led consultative process that has annual  meetings as well as workshops and roundtables throughout the year on the themes set by   65  new models of international agreementthe chair.


although not a decision-making body, the gfmd has proven to be a useful way  for governments, in collaboration with civil society and the private sector, to explore new  issues and approaches to common problems.
a.


the nansen initiative  the nansen initiative was launched in 2011 at a ministerial conference commemorating  the 60th anniversary of unhcrs founding and adoption of the 1951 refugee convention.
the aim was to develop an agenda for improving protection of people displaced across  borders by natural disasters and the slow onset effects of climate change.


the impact of  climate change on displacement had long been a concern to antonio guterres, then the  high commissioner.
as early as 2007, he gave voice to his concerns:  when we consider the different models for the impact of climate change, the picture  is very worrying.


the need for people to move will keep on growing.
one need only  look at east africa and the sahel region.


all predictions are that desertification will  expand  steadily.
for  the  population,  this  means  decreasing  livelihood  prospects  and increased migration.


all of this is happening in the absence of international  capacity and political will to respond.
(guterres 2007) the following year, assistant high commissioner for protection erika feller summarized  the dilemma before the unhcr executive committee: new terminology is entering the  displacement lexicon with some speed.


the talk is now of ecological refugees,climate  change refugees, the natural disaster displaced.
this is all a serious context for unhcrs  efforts to fulfill its mandate for its core beneficiaries  the mix of global challenges is  explosive,  and  one  with  which  we  and  our  partners,  government  and  non-government,  must together strike the right balance (feller 2008).


in an address before the un security  council in november 2011  with famine and displacement in somalia heavily on his  mind  high commissioner guterres returned to the theme: we should be addressing the  more complex issue of the way in which global warming, rising sea levels, changing weather  patterns and other manifestations of climate change are interacting with and reinforcing  other global imbalances, so as to produce some very powerful drivers of instability, conflict  and displacement (guterres 2011, 3).
in the lead-up to the ministerial conference, the organization commissioned new research  on climate change and displacement.


preparatory meetings were held in bellagio (unhcr  2011) and oslo (nansen conference 2011) to discuss gaps in the international response to  the evolving phenomena.
the june 2011 oslo conference resulted in the nansen principles,  which outlined core approaches for addressing both internal and international displacement.


recognizing that the guiding principles on internal displacement already covered those  displaced by natural disasters and other environmental disruptions, the nansen principles  urged action on cross-border movements: a more coherent and consistent approach at the  international level is needed to meet the protection needs of people displaced externally  owing to sudden-onset disasters.
states, working in conjunction with unhcr and other  relevant stakeholders, could develop a guiding framework or instrument in this regard  (nansen conference 2011, 5).


66  journal on migration and human securitythe initial hope was that governments would back reforms in the institutional arrangements,  particularly for responding to natural disasters, in the ministerial conference.
this would  have helped clarify under which situations unhcr should take leadership in assisting  and protecting victims.


there was no inclination, however, on the part of the governments  for unhcr to become more systematically involved with migrants who cross borders  because of natural disasters or climate change.
the ministerial conference instead gave  very indirect acknowledgement of the problem:  we note that todays challenges in providing protection and achieving solutions  continue to be serious, interconnected and complex we will reinforce cooperation  with  each  other  and  work  with  unhcr  and  other  relevant  stakeholders,  as  appropriate,  to  deepen  our  understanding  of  evolving  patterns  of  displacement  and to agree upon ways to respond to the challenges we face in a changing global  context.


(unhcr 2011)  the swiss and norwegian governments did take up the call in the nansen principles for  more attention to protection needs, pledging to fund an intergovernmental process that  would  examine  the  issue  and  make  recommendations  for  enhancing  protection  in  both  acute emergencies and slow onset processes.
switzerland and norway asked walter kalin, formerly the special representative of the  secretary-general and one of the principal architects of the guiding principles on internal  displacement, to take on the leadership of the initiative, serving as the chairs envoy.


the  nansen  initiative  was  clear  in  stating,  however,  that  it  does  not  seek  to  develop  new  legal standards, but rather to build consensus among states on the elements of a protection  agenda,  which  may  include  standards  of  treatment  (nansen  initiative,  about  us).
there was no expectation that the process would lead to a set of guiding principles on  cross-border displacement that would be equivalent to the ones developed for internally  displaced persons.


the initiative was governed by a steering committee, chaired by switzerland and norway,  and  including  australia,  bangladesh,  costa  rica,  germany,  kenya,  mexico,  and  the  philippines.
a consultative committee3 was formed to bring the expertise of representatives  from international organizations dealing with displacement and migration issues, climate  change and development, researchers, think tanks, and non-governmental organizations to  bear.


a friends of the initiative allowed other governments to provide advice and remain  informed of the deliberations.
finally, a secretariat supported the work of the initiative.


the main fact-finding activities were a series of regional consultations to pull together  evidence about the impacts of natural disasters and climate change on displacement and to  solicit the views of governments and civil society.
the secretariat also distilled the lessons  of research for the initiatives consideration and commissioned background papers on a  number of topics.


the end product was the agenda for the protection of cross-border displaced persons  in the context of disasters and climate change (nansen initiative 2015).
it recommends  action  in  three  principal  areas.


the  first  is  to  improve  the  collection  of  data  and  to   3   the author was a member of the consultative committee.
67  new models of international agreementenhance knowledge on cross-border disaster-displacement.


more specifically, the agenda  recommends  improvements  in  the  collection,  consolidation,  and  analysis  of  gender-  and age-disaggregated data regarding the overall number of people displaced in disaster  contexts,  both  internally  and  across  international  borders,  based  on  clear  criteria  and  effective methods (nansen initiative 2015, 45).
it also calls for new methodologies to  identify those at risk of being displaced in disaster contexts, including across international  borders  and  new  research  to  determine  to  what  extent  men  and  women  already  rely  on migration as a strategy to cope with the effects of natural hazards and the effects of  climate change, and what lessons can be learned for improving the benefits of migration  and addressing related protection risks (nansen initiative 2015, 45).


finally, the agenda  in the first area of action emphasizes the need for additional data and analysis of planned  relocation processes in the context of disasters and effects of climate change.
the second area of the agenda focuses on humanitarian protection measures for cross- border, disaster-displaced persons, including mechanisms for lasting solutions (nansen  initiative  2015,  44).


these  measures  include  ones  related  to  the  admission  of  disaster  displaced persons from abroad as well as those preventing the return of displaced persons  to countries experiencing natural disasters and the effects of climate change.
the agenda  points to the need for new legal instruments and policies that would, for example, grant  temporary entry and stay for cross-border disaster-displaced persons, such as through the  issuance of humanitarian visas or other exceptional migration measures (nansen initiative  2015, 26).


it also emphasizes that governments could use existing legal frameworks, such  as existing temporary labor migration programs, more creatively to permit admission and  stay of those needing protection.
the third set of recommendations is aimed at strengthening the management of disaster  displacement risk in the country of origin so that those affected by natural disasters and  the effects of climate change would not need to cross international borders.


these include  [i]ntegrating human mobility within disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation  strategies, and other relevant development processes;  [i]mproving the use of planned  relocation as preventative or responsive measure to disaster risk and displacement; [and]   [e]nsuring that the needs of idps displaced in disaster situations are specifically addressed  by  relevant  laws  and  policies  on  disaster  risk  management  or  internal  displacement  (nansen initiative 2015, 19, 53).
finally, the agenda notes that legal migration can prevent  displacement since they allow people to move in a safe and orderly manner.


the agenda was endorsed by 109 governmental delegations during a global multi-sectoral  consultation in october 2015.
more than 360 participants from governments, international  organizations, academic institutions, and civil society attended.


that so large a number of  governments endorsed the agenda was impressive.
those that spoke at the consultation noted  the utility of the agenda and the flexibility of governments to adopt its recommendations in  accord with national law.


b.
migrants in countries in crisis initiative (micic)  the origins of the micic initiative are similar to nansen, whose success influenced its  development.


sir  peter  sutherland,  the  special  representative  of  the  secretary-general,   68  journal on migration and human securityplayed the role that high commissioner guterres did in urging governments to fill the  protection gap for non-nationals caught in acute emergencies resulting from conflict and  natural  disaster.
the  mass  displacement  of  migrant  workers  in  libya  during  the  2011  conflict, followed by similar crises in cote divoire,syria, thailand, and the united states4  that affected millions of non-nationals, generated substantial interest among governments,  civil society, and the private sector.


in support of sir peter and with funding from the  macarthur foundation, georgetown universitys institute for the study of international  migration (isim) commissioned a paper outlining the protection gaps (koser 2014) and  produced desk studies of the major crises involving displacement of non-nationals.
the call for action was met with a positive response by the united states and the philippines.


in her plenary statement at the 2013 high-level dialogue on migration and development,  assistant secretary anne richard, thanking sir peter and noting the seriousness of the  problem, pledged on behalf of the united states to chair what became the micic initiative.
she used language similar to nansens in describing the initiative: i envision a state-led  process aimed at examining the responsibilities of different actors in these crisis situations  (richard  2013).


a  working  group  was  subsequently  named;  in  addition  to  the  united  states and the philippines, australia, bangladesh, costa rica, ethiopia, and the european  commission also served on it, as did the international organization for migration (iom),  unhcr, the international centre for migration policy development (icmpd), and isim.
micic also worked in similar ways to nansen.


a grant from the united states established  a secretariat based in iom; the european commission funded regional consultations; and  the united states and australia supported consultations with civil society and the private  sector,  as  well  as  with  members  and  friends  of  the  intergovernmental  consultation  on  migration, refugees, and asylum seekers.
the european commission also supported a  research program that examined the longer-term impacts of the crises on migrants and the  united states supported capacity building for countries experiencing the impacts of these  crises.


the results of the consultations and research contributed to a set of principles, guidelines, and  effective practices that were presented on june 15, 2016 at the united nations.
the principles  focused on core rights and responsibilities.


the duty to save lives in conflict and disasters  is the first responsibility; as such, the humanitarian principles of neutrality, impartiality,  and independence should govern responses to migrants in these crisis situations.
to ensure  effective  protection,  the  principle  of  non-discrimination,  particularly  by  immigration  status, when lives are at risk permeates the recommendations.


the principles and resulting  guidelines emphasize that states have primary responsibility but that other stakeholders,  including non-nationals themselves, play an important role in ensuring protection.
in that  respect,  principle  6  states  clearly  that  migrants  are  rights  holders  and  capable  actors,  resilient and creative in the face of adversities, not merely victims or passive recipients of  assistance (micic 2016,16).


the guidelines are described as targeted suggestions, organized by theme, that identify  in  broad  terms  the  actions  needed  to  better  protect  migrants  in  countries  experiencing   4   for more information on the displacement of migrants during these crises, see weerasinghe and taylor  (2015).
69  new models of international agreementcrises.


states, private sector actors, international organizations, and civil society can use  the  guidelines  to  inform  and  shape  crisis  preparedness,  emergency  response,  and  post- crisis action (micic 2016, 19).
they are organized around the phases of crises: pre-,  during-  and  post-crisis.


each  is  elaborated  with  concrete  practices  that  would  aid  their  implementation.
the most detail is provided on pre-crisis emergency preparedness since  this is the phase in which much can be done to lay the groundwork for effective action  during crises.


the guidelines recognize, however, that crises often take on lives of their  own and needs and contexts depart from even the best laid plans.
as such, they recommend  continual assessment of the situation and flexibility to adapt and innovate as needed during  the  emergency  response  period.


they  also  take  into  account  that  the  post-crisis  stage  requires  special  attention  to  the  long-term  needs  of  migrants  displaced  by  conflict  and  disasters as well as to the needs of communities to which they may need to relocate.
v.


conclusion the nansen and micic initiatives represent new ways in which governments and other  stakeholders are attempting to address persistent protection gaps for those displaced by  crises.
unlike earlier efforts that focused primarily on adoption of binding international  conventions, these initiatives are less formal, more ad hoc, and less binding.


the reluctance  of many states to ratify the un convention on the rights of all migrant workers and  members of their families or to open up the 1951 convention relating to the status of  refugees to renegotiation has heralded the need for such initiatives.
in the first case, the  reluctance appears to be concerns about over-reach, particularly with regard to migrants in  irregular status.


in the second case, amid backlashes against refugees and asylum seekers,  the concern is about losing the protections currently available to those populations.
in the face of such impasses, informal, non-binding, state-led processes for reform are seen  as a more pragmatic approach.


there are a number of reasons to be optimistic about this  trend.
first, promulgation of the guiding principles on internal displacement has proven  to be a highly effective way to gain visibility and improved protection for a population  that had not previously received sufficient attention.


they have been recognized widely  as applicable to a broad range of persons forced to leave their homes because of events  beyond their own control.
the guiding principles have broad support, as witnessed by  the 2005 world summits entreaty to states and international organizations to implement  them.


many individual countries have incorporated them into national law and the african  union has promulgated a binding convention based on them.
a second reason to recommend this approach is that, because states are leading these efforts,  there is a built-in constituency for ensuring their implementation.


the nansen initiative has  been succeeded by the platform on disaster displacement, which was announced at the  world humanitarian summit in may 2016.
the platform will follow up on nansen and  implement the recommendations of the agenda for protection by building partnerships  between  policymakers,  practitioners  and  researchers  and  constitute  a  multi-stakeholder  forum for dialogue, information sharing as well as policy and normative development  (platform  on  disaster  displacement,  about  us).


the  chairs  of  the  micic  initiative  have pledged a similar follow-up process, with continuation of the secretariats capacity- building and other activities.
70  journal on migration and human securitythird, these processes have been highly inclusive in terms of regional scope and participation.


members of the steering/working groups have come from all regions.
regional variations  have been solicited in consultations that brought together governments, civil society, the  private  sector,  international  organizations,  and  the  research  community.


the  resulting  recommendations have been vetted with multiple stakeholders, although responsibility for  issuing them ultimately rests with the states that lead them.
finally, the ad hoc nature of these processes allows them to address emerging issues and  concerns  more  effectively  than  more  formal  mechanisms  that  are  often  tied  to  specific  mandates.


micic was criticized by some civil society organizations and a few governments  at its inception because its focus was restricted to migrants affected by conflict and natural  disasters.
the critics urged the working group to address the problems of those in crises  stemming from other causes  for example, irregular migrants stranded by smugglers en  route to their destination.


fearing that it would be more difficult to build consensus around  solid recommendations on other populations, the working group held fast.
however, micic  made a clear statement that notwithstanding the limited scope of the micic initiative,  it is hoped and expected that its outcomes will be useful for states and other stakeholders  in addressing a broader range of migration scenarios (micic, about micic).


in fact,  many of the recommendations in the micic guidelines do apply more broadly and civil  society groups could readily use them to advocate on behalf of all vulnerable migrants.
most notably, principle 2 states: as human beings, all migrants are entitled to human  rights, regardless of their immigration status.


at all times, the human rights of migrants  should  be  respected,  protected,  and  fulfilled  in  a  non-discriminatory  manner  and  in  accordance with applicable international law (micic 2016,15).
members of the working  group have also been supportive of the recommendation in the secretary-generals report  for the high-level meeting on large-scale migration and refugee movements to form a  working group similar to micic on vulnerable migrants more generally.


this is not to say that the ad hoc, non-binding nature of the processes is without problems.
as  has  been  seen  regarding  protection  of  internally  displaced  persons,  progress  is  still  highly  dependent  on  the  willingness  of  states  to  implement  the  guiding  principles  and  the  international  community  to  intercede  when  states  are  unwilling  or  unable  to  fulfill  their responsibilities.


the attention span of key stakeholders to issues surrounding internal  displacement has varied considerably.
as the european migrant and refugee crisis took  center stage in the media and among governments, a group of experts found it necessary  to issue a statement in october 2015 stating: there is urgent need to raise the visibility  of idps in two principal regards: gaining access to idps in acute crises, such as syria, in  order to provide effective protection; and finding solutions for idps in the many protracted   situations  of  displacement  that  have  already  lasted  for  decades.


the  group  called  for  institutional reforms to enhance the protection of idps both in situations of armed conflict  and disasters, recommending the re-establishment of the post of special representative of  the secretary-general for internally displaced persons.
enhancing  protection  of  those  displaced  by  conflict,  natural  disasters,  and  other  crises  will require sustained attention.


mechanisms such as the nansen and micic initiatives,  and their follow-up, are promising ways to foster greater attention to the protection gaps  and practical solutions to improve the lives of millions of people affected by crises.
in   71  new models of international agreementthe  long  term,  however,  they  will  only  be  as  effective  as  the  willingness  of  states  and  other  stakeholders  to  implement  the  recommendations  and  offer  protection  on  a  non- discriminatory basis to all who flee life-threatening situations.


