the intersection of statelessness  and refugee protection in us  asylum policy   maryellen fullerton brooklyn law school   executive summary more  than  ten  million  people  are  stateless  today.
in  a  world  of  nation  states, they live on the margins without membership in any state, and, as a  consequence, have few enforceable legal rights.


stateless individuals face  gaps in protection and in many cases experience persecution that falls within  the  refugee  paradigm.
however,  us  asylum  policy  does  not  adequately  address the myriad legal problems that confront the stateless, who have  been largely invisible in the jurisprudence and academic literature.


two federal appellate court opinions shed new light on the intersection of  statelessness and refugee law in the united states.
in 2010, haile v.


holder  examined the asylum claim of a young man rendered stateless when the  ethiopian government issued a decree denationalizing ethnic eritreans.
in a 2011 case, stserba v.


holder, the court reviewed an asylum claim by  a woman who became stateless when the soviet union collapsed, and the  successor state of estonia enacted citizenship legislation that included a  language requirement.
this article analyzes the opinions which suggest  that  state  action  depriving  residents  of  citizenship  on  ethnic  and  other  protected  grounds  warrants  a  presumption  of  persecution.


this  article  also identifies additional circumstances in which stateless individuals may  have a well-founded fear of persecution that qualifies them for asylum in  the united states.
in  addition,  this  article  notes  that  although  far  too  many  stateless  individuals face persecution, not all of them do.


stateless persons who do  not fear persecution, however, are also vulnerable.
the absence of state  protection condemns them to a precarious existence and their inability to  obtain passports or other travel documents often prevents their return to  states where they formerly resided.


the refusal of most states to admit  noncitizens frequently keeps stateless persons in limbo.
stateless individuals  stranded  in  the  united  states  live  under  a  supervisory  patchwork  that  serves neither their interests nor those of the united states.


rather than  relying on incremental case law developments and inapposite regulatory  schemes,  the  us  state  department  and  the  department  of  homeland    2014 by the center for migration studies of new york.
all rights reserved.


jmhs volume 2 number 3 (2014): 144-164 security should convene a task force to report on the size and composition  of the stateless population in the united states and the need to develop  legislative, regulatory, and other policy guidance concerning statelessness  claims.
introduction half a century ago, earl warren, the former chief justice of the united states supreme  court said, citizenship is mans basic right, for it is nothing less than the right to have  rights.


1 without  citizenship,  individuals  lack  the  mechanisms  to  access  their  rights.
a  central notion of refugee law is that those who fear persecution in their homeland and  cannot rely on their own government to protect their rights can call upon the international  community to provide protection.


refugees may possess passports, a firm sense of national  identity,  and  a  legal  basis  for  citizenship,  but  their  formal  citizenship  does  not  protect  them.
they are de facto stateless while the threat of persecution continues, and they need  surrogate protection, which treaty and customary international refugee law have evolved to  provide (see, e.


g.
, goodwin-gill and mcadam 2007).


but what about those who are really stateless?
in a world of nation states, the de jure stateless  lack the right to have rights.


because no government recognizes them as citizens, they  are uniquely vulnerable.
frequently, stateless persons do not have birth certificates; many  cannot obtain travel documents to visit family members in other states or seek opportunities  elsewhere.


a state may, as a matter of national law, authorize stateless residents to remain,  to work, to go to school, and to partake in other aspects of the life of the community.
a  state may, as a matter of policy, extend to stateless individuals all the rights and protections  extended to other noncitizens, and these rights may be substantial.


nonetheless, if the state  of residence chooses not to allow noncitizens to remain, the statelessin contrast to other  noncitizen residentshave no other state to fall back on.
stateless persons who migrate to  obtain work often find their residence permission tied to their employment authorization.


if the job ends and they are ordered to leave, no other state, including the state where they  were born, has an obligation to allow them to enter.
in these circumstances, statelessness is  rightslessness (darling 2009).


denial  of  re-entry,  refusal  to  provide  birth  certificates,  and  inability  to  obtain  travel  documents are examples of the protection needs of the stateless.
to date, us refugee law  and policy have largely failed to identify and address these and other legal problems that  confront stateless persons.


2 in many instances stateless populations face severe harm that  rises  to  the  level  of  persecution.
these  situations  fall  within  the  ambit  of  refugee  law,  although,  thus  far,  they  have  been  largely  invisible  in  the  jurisprudence  and  academic  literature.


in other cases, the vulnerability and uncertainty in which stateless persons live may not  trigger the protections of refugee law.
this, however, does not mean that protection is  unwarranted.


rather, the precarious situation of stateless individuals stranded far from  1  perez v.
brownell, 356 u.


s.
44, 64 (1958) (dissenting opinion).


2  this analysis does not focus on the protections that international human rights law may confer upon the  stateless.
145  the intersection of statelessness and refugee protection in us asylum policytheir former residence suggests that statelessness raises complex protection concerns and,  at times, may point to the need for different solutions that refugee law cannot provide.


this article examines two federal appellate court opinions, haile v.
holder3 and stserba  v.


holder,4 that shed light on ways in which statelessness may be a form of persecution.
it  also  identifies  additional  circumstances  in  which  stateless  persons  may  have  a  well- founded fear of persecution that qualifies them for asylum in the united states.


in addition,  it identifies some of the practical problems facing stateless persons whose claims do not  fall  within  the  refugee  paradigm,  and  suggests  policy  approaches  to  protect  stateless  individuals marooned in the united states.
background  the 1951 convention relating to the status of refugees extends its protections to persons  who are outside their country of nationality and unable or unwilling to avail themselves of  its protection due to their fear of persecution on account of their race, religion, nationality,  political opinion, or membership in a particular social group.


5 the convention expressly  acknowledged  that  stateless  persons  may  need  protection:  it  includes  in  the  refugee  definition  those  not  having  a  nationality  and  being  outside  [their]  country  of  former  habitual residence who are unable or, due to their fear of persecution, unwilling to return to  their former residence.
6  this explicit text notwithstanding, the stateless have been largely  unnoticed in the scheme of international lawfallen between the cracks in a system built  on nation states.


7   the  post-world  war  ii  diplomatic  community  that  drafted  the  conventions  concerning  refugees and stateless persons assumed that statelessness was a temporary phenomenon.
the stateless were a byproduct of the ravages of a global war, the disintegration of empire,  and  the  decolonization  process  (see  hathaway  1991).


statelessness  would  gradually  diminish  as  the  age  of  empire  ceased,  colonies  gained  independence,  and  the  post-war   3  591 f.
3d 572 (7th cir.


2010).
4  646 f.


3d 964 (6th cir.
2011).


5  for the purposes of the present convention, the term refugee shall apply to any person who [a]s a result  of events occurring before january 1,1951 and owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of  race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion, is outside the country  of his nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that  country; or who, not having a nationality and being outside the country of his former habitual residence as  a result of such events, is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to return to it.
article 1.


a (2), 1951  convention relating to the status of refugees, signed july 28, 1951, 189 u.
n.


t.
s.


137 [emphasis added].
see  also 1967 protocol relating to the status of refugees, done january 31, 1967, 19 u.


s.
t.


6  article 1 a (2).
7  there are two international treaties that address statelessness, the 1954 convention relating to the status  of stateless persons, adopted july 28, 1951, g.


a.
resolution 429(v), 360 u.


n.
t.


s.
117, entered into force,  june 6, 1960, and the 1961 convention on the reduction of statelessness, adopted august 30, 1961, g.


a.
resolution 896(ix), 989 u.


n.
t.


s.
175, entered into force, december 13, 1975.


only 74 states are parties  to the 1954 convention, and even fewer  45  have ratified the treaty that commits states to take concrete  measures to reduce statelessness (see unhcr, un conventions on statelessness: key for protecting the  stateless,  http://www.
unhcr.org/pages/4a2535c3d.


html).
these  treaties  have  attracted  far  fewer  than  the  145 states that have ratified the 1951 refugee convention and the jurisprudence concerning statelessness is  minimal.


146  journal on migration and human securityworld was rebuilt and revitalized.
during its first half century, the united nations did not  task any unit or agency to attend to the stateless.


8   history proved the predictions wrong.
the office of the united nations high commissioner  for refugees (unhcr) estimates that there are 10 million stateless people in the world  today.


9 in the 1990s, the un general assembly formally placed the stateless within the  unhcr mandate.
10   statelessness in recent history has often resulted from political upheaval, armed conflict, or  ethnic targeting.


for example, more than one million rohingya muslims who live on the  borders of myanmar and bangladesh are denied nationality by each state (pitman 2012).
they are derided as illegal immigrants, though their families have resided in the same  villages for multiple generations.


they need government permission to leave their villages,  to marry, or to have more than two children.
fleeing from communal violence, boatloads of  rohingya have been turned back by coast guard units in bangladesh and elsewhere (ibid.


).
palestinians form another large stateless community.


the population displaced by the arab- israeli war of 1948 has taken root in many other countries in the middle east.
lebanon,  syria,  and  other  arab  states  that  host  large  groups  of  palestinians  generally  provide  residence  and  travel  permits,  but  not  citizenship.


11  while  many  palestinians  acquired  jordanian nationality, the past decade has seen jordans withdrawal of citizenship from  thousands of palestinians (human rights watch 2010).
the uprisings in the arab world  and unsettled situations in the region have exacerbated the insecurity of the stateless and  placed many palestinians and others in peril.


in september 2013, many thousands born in the dominican republic became subject to  statelessness when the constitutional court of the dominican republic issued a decision  that  interpreted  a  constitutional  provision  concerning  citizenship  to  exclude  those  born  in the dominican republic to unauthorized migrants during the past 85 years.
12 ruling  that  children  born  in  the  dominican  republic  to  foreigners  in  transit  do  not  obtain  citizenship, the court held that unauthorized migrants were in transit, notwithstanding  the official registration of their children as dominicans, their acceptance as such by the  larger community, and the fact that they have lived their entire lives there.


13 moreover,  8  international law defines a stateless person as a person who is not considered a national by any state under  the operation of its law.
art.


1, 1954 convention relating to the status of stateless persons, done september  28, 1954, 360 u.
n.


t.
s.


117.
see batchelor 1998 for a discussion on the anticipated interaction between  statelessness and refugee protection.


9  unhcr estimates there were 16.
7 million refugees, more than 10 million stateless people, and 33.


3 million  internally displaced persons in 2013 (unhcr 2014a, 2).
10  see g.


a.
res.


a/res/50/152, february 9, 1996; unhcr, http://www.
unhcr.org/pages/49c3646c16a.


html.
11  see, e.


g.
, ouda v.


ins, 324 f.
3d 445 (6th cir.


2003) (stateless palestinians born in kuwait traveled on  egyptian travel documents); faddoul v.
ins, 37 f.


3d 185 (5th cir.
1994) (stateless palestinian born in saudi  arabia traveled on lebanese travel documents).


see generally unrwa, palestine refugees, http://www.
unrwa.org/etemplate.


php?
id=86.


12   sentencia  tc/0168/13,  constitutional  court  of  the  dominican  republic,  september  23,  2013,  http:// www.
refworld.org/docid/526900c14.


html.
13  id.


the constitutional court ruled against ms.
juliana dequis pierre, who had been born in the dominican  republic to parents who had migrated from haiti decades earlier.


ms.
dequis pierre, herself the mother of  four dominican-born children, had been officially registered at birth as a dominican citizen (see unhcr  2013).


147  the intersection of statelessness and refugee protection in us asylum policythe court concluded that this citizenship provision applied retroactively to 1929.
14  the  impact of this ruling fell largely on the sizeable group of longtime residents who are of  haitian descent; some estimate 200,000 individuals could be affected (archibold 2013).


many found themselves suddenly bereft of the right as citizens to seek the governments  protection, and violent attacks against haitians in the dominican republic have intensified  their  sense  of  insecurity  (delva  2013).
those  who  have  never  been  to  haiti,  do  not  speak the language, and have no family or work prospects there were not comforted by  the  dominican  republics  assertion  that  they  can  apply  to  the  haitian  government  for  recognition as haitian citizens.


15    perhaps the greatest cause of the increase in stateless populations during recent decades  has been the dissolution of states.
for example, the end of the soviet union in 1991 left  close to 300 million soviet citizens in need of acquiring a new nationality.


the successor  states adopted different nationality laws that left substantial numbers of long-time residents  without citizenship (unhcr 1996).
similar problems arose in the dissolution of yugoslavia  in the early 1990s, and in the velvet divorce of the czech republic and slovakia in 1993  (unhcr 2000).


the independence of eritrea from ethiopia later that same year may have  created additional groups of stateless persons, and the subsequent border war resulted in  discriminatory denationalizations.
the arab spring revolutions that began in 2011 may  also produce further groups of stateless people.


in  addition  to  political  upheaval,  a  number  of  other  factors  contribute  to  statelessness.
these  include  the  inability  of  many  vulnerable  populations  to  register  births,  gender  discrimination in nationality laws, and the impact of jus sanguinis citizenship regimes.


16  many parents are unable to register the births of their children, in particular when families  have  been  displaced  from  their  homes.
whether  forced  migrants  remain  within  their  country  of  residence  or  cross  territorial  borders,  they  frequently  do  not  have  access  to  registration  offices  (unhcr  1996).


sometimes  those  living  in  camps  or  temporary  shelters find registration officials reluctant to issue documents to non-permanent residents.
in  other  cases  individuals  in  short-term  accommodations  or  in  flight  think  they  should  delay registration until they return home or until they reach a final destination.


by the  time they doif they doreach someplace they can call home, the registry offices may  no longer be open to them.
those whose births have not been registered or who cannot  produce evidence of registration are unable to prove where they were born or who their  parents are.


children without birth certificates grow up to be adults whom no country will  acknowledge as nationals.
gender discrimination in nationality laws can also result in statelessness (unhcr 2012a).


14  id.
in addition to denying that ms.


dequis pierre is a citizen, the court instructed government officials to  identify similarly situated persons who had been registered as dominican citizens since 1929.
for additional  commentary, see aber and small 2013.


15  the government of the dominican republic also stated it would propose legislation that would provide  a pathway for long-term residents to regularize their status and eventually to naturalize (fieser 2014).
in  may 2014 the congress of the dominican republic passed legislation granting citizenship to children born  to foreign parents, provided the children have dominican government identification documents and are listed  in the civil registry (archibold 2014).


the number of people who will benefit from the new law is unclear.
16   under  jus  sanguinis  principles,  citizenship  is  based  on  the  citizenship  of  the  parents;  under  jus  soli,  citizenship is based on the territory in which the birth occurs.


148  journal on migration and human securitystatutes that link citizenship of married women to their husbands can leave women stateless  if  their  spouses  die  or  divorce  them  (ibid.
;  see  also  unhcr  2014b  and  2012b).


even  without death or divorce, women can become stateless if their home state automatically  deprives them of citizenship upon marriage to a national of another state, yet their husbands  state does not automatically grant citizenship based on marriage.
gender discrimination  combined with jus sanguinis principles can increase the incidence of statelessness.


to give  an example, some states confer citizenship at birth according to paternal descent.
a woman  from such a country married to a stateless man would not be able to pass her citizenship  to her child, who would be stateless.


another common example is that of children born to  unmarried parents who receive at birth the citizenship only of the mother.
if the mother is  stateless, so is the child, even if the father is a national of the state where the child is born.


even in the absence of gender discrimination, jus sanguinis approaches to citizenship may  lead to statelessness.
some states require citizens born abroad to reside in the home country  for a specified period of time in order to retain the citizenship they acquired from their  parents at birth.


17 families that live and work abroad for many years may be unable to  satisfy the home country residence requirement.
these and other scenarios contribute to  the persistence of statelessness today.


us law: statelessness as persecution the refugee act of 1980, generally tracking the 1951 convention, specifies that stateless  persons fall within the refugee definition when they face persecution or a well-founded fear  of persecution in their country of residence on one of the enumerated grounds.
18  the us  refugee definition is even more expansive than the 1951 convention definition, in ways  that may be especially pertinent to those who are stateless.


first, in contrast to the 1951 convention, the us refugee legislation encompasses those  who suffered persecution in the past but no longer face a threat of future persecution.
19  accordingly, stateless populations who have already suffered severe harm may be able to  receive protection in the united states even though they lack evidence of current persecutory  threats.


us law requires that the past persecution must have been linked to race, religion,  nationality, political opinion, or membership in a social group,20 and these types of animus  are frequently the basis for hostility directed against groups that are stateless.
17  e.


g.
, us legislation confers citizenship at birth to a child born outside of us territory to parents who are  us citizens only if one of the parents resided in the us prior to the birth of the child.


ina  301(c).
if one  parent is a us citizen and the other is not, a child born outside of us territory acquires citizenship at birth  only if the us citizen parent was physically present in the us for at least 5 years or more, at least 2 years of  which were after the parent was 14 years old.


ina  301(g).
18  the term refugee means any person who is outside any country of such persons nationality or, in the  case of a person having no nationality, is outside any country in which such person has habitually resided.


.
.


.
ina  101(a)(42).


19  the term refugee means (a) any person who is outside any country of such persons nationality or, in  the case of a person having no nationality, is outside any country in which such person has habitually resided.
.


.
.


and who is unable or unwilling to return to .
.


.
that country because of persecution or a well-founded fear  of persecution on account of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political  opinion.


.
.


.
ina  101(a)(42).


20  id.
149  the intersection of statelessness and refugee protection in us asylum policyin addition, pursuant to the us refugee definition, those who have not left their country  of nationality or residence may receive protection.


21 the stateless, who frequently lack  the ability to obtain travel documents, often find it difficult to cross international borders.
while remaining in the country where they reside precludes them from refugee protection  under  the  1951  convention,  even  if  they  have  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution,  this  limitation does not interfere with protection under us refugee law.


despite the elaboration of the us refugee definition in ways that increase the likelihood of  its applicability to stateless individuals, the case law is sparse.
two federal court opinions,  in 2010 and 2011, addressed claims for protection raised by stateless persons.


together,  the cases begin to explicate the circumstances in which statelessness constitutes a form of  persecution in the context of us asylum policy.
haile v.


holder  in a 2010 case, haile v.
holder,22 the us court of appeals for the seventh circuit examined  the  asylum  application  of temesgen woldu  haile,  a  young  man  born  in addis ababa,  ethiopia in 1976 to parents of eritrean background.


haile and his parents were citizens  of ethiopia, at that time ruled by mengistu, the soviet-backed military dictator.
after the  soviet  union  collapsed,23  mengistus  government  was  overthrown,  a  new  transitional  government was formed, and a referendum about the independence of eritrea from ethiopia  was scheduled.


the referendum vote was overwhelmingly in favor of independence, and  eritrea became independent in 1993.
a year earlier, in 1992, hailes parents had moved to  eritrea, leaving their teenage son in ethiopia.


after independence, the parents renounced  their ethiopian citizenship and acquired eritrean citizenship.
the son had remained in  ethiopia, where he  resided in 1998 when war broke out between eritrea and ethiopia over  the territorial boundary between the two countries.


24 the war brought mass deportations,  with each country deporting thousands of citizens and residents of the wrong background.
for  example,  ethiopia  decided  to  identify  and  expel  residents  of  eritrean  origin  who  provided support to eritrea.


this led to the expulsion of more than 75,000 ethiopia citizens  of eritrean heritage, many in an arbitrary and vengeful manner with no proof of disloyalty  to ethiopia (see human rights watch 2003).
the war ended in 2000, but tensions remained  high between the two countries.


25 after the fighting concluded, ethiopia passed several   21   the  term  refugee  [encompasses]  in  such  special  circumstances  as  the  president  after  appropriate  consultation .
.


.
may specify, any person who is within the country of such persons nationality or, in the  case of a person having no nationality, within the country in which such person is habitually residing, and is  persecuted or has a well-founded fear of persecution.


.
.


.
ina  101(a)(42).


22  591 f.
3d 572 (7th cir.


2010).
for additional commentary on haile v.


holder, see forbes 2013.
23  the collapse of the soviet union had consequences, direct and indirect, on the political events that gave  rise to both haile v.


holder and stserba v.
holder, the subsequent case.


when the soviet union dissolved,  estonia  and  the  other  former  soviet  republics  became  independent  countries.
in  the  baltic  region  and  elsewhere, the result of new citizenship legislation was that many lifelong residents lost their nationality.


see barrington 1999 and visek 1997.
farther afield, the collapse of the soviet union led to the evaporation  of soviet aid to africa, which indirectly led to the downfall of the ethiopian government.


subsequent events  there, especially the border war between ethiopia and eritrea, manifested longstanding ethnic hostilities and  resulted in deportations and actions to strip citizenship from groups of residents.
24  id.


at 573.
25  591 f.


3d at 575.
150  journal on migration and human securitylaws allowing certain categories of former citizens and residents who had suffered during  the war to apply to regain their property and their citizenship.


it is unclear whether these  laws have been effective.
26 haile, who was 21 or 22 years of age when war broke out, fled ethiopia and ultimately  applied for asylum in the united states, alleging that ethiopias removal of citizenship  from  ethnic  eritreans  constituted  persecution.


the  immigration  judge  rejected  his  application after reviewing a record that apparently contained no evidence that haile had  been arrested, harassed or otherwise targeted for persecution before he left ethiopia.
27 the  immigration judge ruled that a country has the sovereign right to define its citizenry, and  that the removal of citizenship does not constitute persecution per se.


28 because haile did  not allege other harsh treatment, the judge concluded that haile had had neither suffered  persecution in the past, nor was likely to suffer harm in the future now that the war had  ended.
accordingly, the immigration judge denied his claim;29 the board of immigration  appeals  (bia)  affirmed.


30 the  us  court  of appeals  for  the  seventh  circuit  remanded  the case to the bia to examine more closely the claim that haile had been or would be  deprived of his ethiopian citizenship:  [the  immigration  judges]  reasoning  is  problematicit  fails  to  recognize  the  fundamental distinction between denying someone citizenship and divesting someone  of citizenship.
.


.
.


[no] case of which we are aware .
.


.
suggests that a government has  the sovereign right to strip citizenship from a class of persons based on their ethnicity.


it is arguable that such a program of denationalization and deportation is in fact a  particularly acute form of persecution.
31   the court expressly declined to analyze whether denationalization as such amounts to  persecution32 and further noted that the record was insufficient to determine the current  citizenship status of ethnic eritreans who had left ethiopia during the war.


33 accordingly,  the court remanded the case to the bia for further factual findings and legal consideration.
the bia rejected the asylum claim a second time.


it reasoned that denationalization does  not always constitute persecution, even when the denationalization is linked with ethnic  group  or  another  ground  protected  by  the  1951  convention.
rather,  the  bia  ruled,  an  asylum applicant must produce some evidence of actual harm that accompanied or resulted  from the loss of citizenship.


34 in hailes second appeal to the seventh circuit, the court  focused on statelessness as persecution:    [although] a change of citizenship incident to a change in national boundaries is not  persecution per se, it does not follow that taking away a persons citizenship because  of his religion or ethnicity is not persecution.
if ethiopia denationalized the petitioner   26  id.


27  id.
at 495.


28  id.
29  id.


30  id.
31  haile v.


gonzales, 421 f 3d 493, 496 (7th cir.
2005) (emphasis in original).


32  id.
33  id.


at 496-7.
34  591 f 3d 572 at 573-4.


151  the intersection of statelessness and refugee protection in us asylum policybecause of his eritrean ethnicity, it did so because of hostility to eritreans; and [this]  created a presumption that he has a well-founded fear of being persecuted should he  be returned to ethiopia.
indeed, if to be made stateless is persecution, as we believe, at  least in the absence of any [contrary explanation], then to be deported to the country  that made you stateless and continues to consider you stateless is to be subjected to  persecution even if the country will allow you to remain and will not bother you as  long as you behave yourself [emphasis added].


35  the court noted that the record lacked information concerning the impact, under either  ethiopian or eritrean law, on a minor child of parental renunciation and/or acquisition of  citizenship.
36 there was also a lack of evidence examining the applicability to haile of a  2003 law allowing ethiopians to regain their nationality if they had lost it by acquiring  another nationality.


37 pointing out that haile had not renounced his ethiopian citizenship in  order to acquire another nationality, but that ethiopia had apparently made him stateless,38  the court remanded the case to the bia for further analysis and proceedings.
although this opinion does not attempt to provide a definitive analysis of statelessness as  a form of persecution, its initial and tentative thinking is instructive.


the seventh circuit  rejected as insufficient the abstract argument that a sovereign has the right to define the  terms of citizenship.
the court insisted that it was relevant to examine the context in which  citizenship decisions are made.


it emphasized three aspects of the governments decree:  the apparent ethnic basis of the decree; the consequent statelessness (as contrasted with  situations in which statelessness might not result); and the governments affirmative action  to strip citizenship from someone who had possessed it for years.
in combination, these  factors appear to bring the case directly within the persecution paradigm: government action  motivated by ethnic animus causing severe harm to a despised minority.


the advance in the  haile courts reasoning is that the issue of statelessness is central, and the court recognizes  that statelessness itself can constitute severe harm.
stserba v.


holder  in 2011, one year later, the sixth circuit addressed another situation of statelessness.
in  stserba v.


holder,39 a woman born in estonia during the soviet era to an ethnic russian  family, claimed that estonias application of its citizenship law to her constituted persecution.
lilia stserba grew up in estonia, but went to russia for her medical training and married  a russian citizen.


40 back in estonia, she practiced medicine and gave birth in estonia to  a son, artjom.
41 after estonia regained its independence from the soviet union in 1991,  there  was  great  hostility  to  the  soviet  oppression  (see,  e.


g.
,  lottman  2008;  barrington   35  id.


at 574  36  id.
at 574-5.


37  id.
38  id.


at 575.
39  646 f.


3d 964 (6th cir.
2011).


for additional commentary on stserba v.
holder, see forbes 2013, and  rempell 2013 (discussing harms that may constitute persecution).


40  prior to the dissolution of the soviet union, of course, stserba and her husband were citizens of the soviet  union.
post dissolution, stserbas husband was a citizen of russia.


id.
at 968.


41  id.
at 968-9 (discussing details of sterbsas life).


152  journal on migration and human security1999; visek 1997).
soviet forces had occupied estonia since the second world war, and  they had made efforts to dilute the estonian population by encouraging ethnic russians to  move to estonia and help pacify the area.


42 the new estonian nationality law automatically  conferred citizenship on those whose families had possessed estonian citizenship prior  to the soviet occupation in 1940.
others, including lifelong residents, were eligible for  citizenship if they could speak estonian and pass a language test (estonia.


eu 2014).
lilia  sterbsa  and  artjom  did  not  qualify  for  citizenship  under  the  new  estonian  law,  presumably because they did not speak estonian.


the record did not indicate whether they  were eligible for russian citizenship via stserbas husband and artjoms father, but they  apparently did not acquire russian citizenship and consequenly became stateless.
43 two  years later, as part of an electoral change, stserba and her son artjom became estonian  citizens.


44 five years after that, in 1998, estonia stopped recognizing scientific degrees  issued by russian institutions, with apparent retroactive effect because stserba reported that  this policy change meant that she could no longer practice medicine in estonian hospitals.
45  stserba and her husband came to the united states in 2003, where stserba applied for  asylum based on the persecution she had suffered on account of her russian ethnicity.


46   the persecution she alleged consisted of her statelessness between 1991 and 1993, the  inability to practice her profession after estonia revoked its recognition of russian scientific  degrees, and claims of inferior medical treatment for her son.
47 the record showed that  roughly 65,000 ethnic russians were naturalized in estonia during the 1990s,48 and that  ethnic  russians  living  in  estonia  without  estonian  citizenship  could  remain  residents,  obtain travel documents, and vote in local elections.


noncitizens, however, could not vote  in national elections, purchase property, or join political parties.
the  immigration  judge  concluded  that  the  harms  that  stserba  had  experienced  did  not  constitute persecution.


he noted that stserba had regained citizenship relatively quickly,  had not suffered any adverse consequences during the time she was stateless, and had  experienced diminished professional opportunities and reduced levels of medical treatment  that did not rise to the level of persecution.
49 the bia affirmed the denial of asylum.


50  the sixth circuit court of appeals expressed a more nuanced view of the situation:   regardless  of  the  practical  ramifications  that  befall  a  denationalized  person,  the  inherent qualities of denationalization are troubling when a country denationalizes a  42  ethnic estonians constituted 88 percent of the population of estonia in 1934.
by 1989, they constituted  only 61 percent (estonia.


eu 2014; barrington 1999; visek 1997).
43  646 f.


3d at 969.
44  id.


45  id.
in addition, stserba testified that the estonian medical treatment for her son anton, who was born with  a severe medical condition, changed for the worse.


id.
at 969-70.


46  stserbas son anton, who had severe medical problems, came to the united states, but her son artjom  remained in estonia.
id.


at 968-9.
47  in addition to allegations that her son anton received inferior medical care stserba alleged that her son  artjom had been harassed after the rest of the family had left for the united states.


id.
48  id.


at 973-4.
49  id.


at 971.
50  id.


the bia also specified that the events involving the son who remained in estonia did not constitute  persecution.
id.


at 978-9.
153  the intersection of statelessness and refugee protection in us asylum policyperson who is not a dual national, thereby making him or her stateless.


statelessness is  a condition deplored in the international community of democracies.
51 the essence  of  denationalization  is  the  total  destruction  of  the  individuals  status  in  organized  society because, [i]n short, the expatriate has lost the right to have rights.


52 while  any one country may accord [a denationalized person] some rights, .
.


.
no country need  do so because he is stateless.


53 the calamity is not the loss of specific rights, then,  but the loss of a community willing and able to guarantee any rights whatsoever.
54   the  united  states  supreme  court  has  described  denationalization  as  a  form  of  punishment  more  primitive  than  torture.


55 accordingly,  because  denationalization  that results in statelessness is an extreme sanction, denationalization may be per se  persecution when it occurs on account of a protected status such as ethnicity.
although  the status of [s]tatelessness .


.
.


does not entitle an applicant to asylum,56 a person  who is made stateless due to his or her membership in a protected group may have  demonstrated persecution, even without proving that he or she has suffered collateral  damage from the act of denationalization.
57  the court noted that there was reason to suspect that the estonian law, though neutral in  its terms, impermissibly targeted ethnic russian residents of estonia.


if so, said the court,  then stserba may have suffered past persecution when she became stateless, whether or not  the statelessness had a serious impact on her daily life.
58 the court remanded the case to  the bia, emphasizing that [a]lthough not every revocation of citizenship is persecution,  ethnically targeted denationalization of people who do not have dual citizenship may be  persecution.


59  denationalization  and  naturalization  laws  resulting   statelessness the sixth and the seventh circuits offer strikingly similar perspectives on fundamental  statelessness issues.
both courts examined the impact of statelessness in the framework of  refugee law where evidence of past or future persecution is central.


both courts emphasized  the salience of government actions that target or have a substantial impact on those who fall   in   51  quoting trop v.
dulles, 356 us 86, 102 (1958)( plurality).


52  id.
at 101-2.


53  id.
at 101.


54   kennedy  v.
mendoza-martinez,  372  us  144,  161  (1963)  (quoting  hannah  arendt,  the  origins  of  totalitarianism 294 (1951)).


55  trop v.
dulles at 101.


56  maxismova v.
holder, 361 f.


appx 690, 693 (6th cir.
2010) (denying asylum to estonian woman claiming  persecution based on statelessness, religious discrimination and ethnic persecution).


57  stserba, 646 f 3d at 974 (emphasis in original).
58  id.


at 975.
the sixth circuit provided further guidance for the bias reconsideration of the case.


the court  emphasized that if the bia concluded that stserba had suffered past persecution, then u.
s.


law would entitle  her to a presumption that she will fear persecution in the future.
8 c.


f.
r.


208.
13(b)(1).


at that point the  government could introduce evidence to rebut the presumption by showing that circumstances had changed  so substantially that future persecution would be unlikely.
the court noted that stserbas reacquisition of  citizenship in 1993 might suggest that things have changed in such a way that she would not have a well- founded fear of future persecution.


59  id.
at 973.


154  journal on migration and human securitywithin one of the grounds enumerated by the 1951 convention.
both courts indicated that  depriving citizens of nationality based on grounds protected by the 1951 convention may  constitute persecution.


moreover, they suggested that withdrawing citizenship in situations  that render individuals stateless is presumptively persecutory.
further, they posited that  denationalization on ethnic grounds that results in statelessness may constitute persecution  per se, obviating the need for applicants to produce evidence that statelessness caused them  practical harm.


because they remanded the cases for further development and analysis,  neither the haile nor the stserba court addressed the type of evidence that might rebut a  presumption of persecution.
the  examinations  of  statelessness  in  haile  and  stserba  are  an  important  step  forward  for  us  refugee  law  and  asylum  policy.


they  acknowledge  the  great  vulnerability  that  statelessness engenders.
they also indicate that when governments take actions that render  people stateless, this should give rise to a presumption of persecution.


this view is in line  with the concept of surrogate protection, one of the central policies of refugee law (see  goodwin-gill  and  mcadam  2007).
when  individuals  cannot  rely  on  their  home  states  to protect them from persecution, they can turn to other states.


those made stateless by  government action should also be able to turn to other states for protection.
it is important to note, however, that the stserba case arose in a significantly different  context from haile.


the dissolution of the soviet union, and with it the disappearance  of  soviet  citizenship,  led  to  substantial  gaps  in  citizenship  law  and  citizenship  status.
each of the new states that arose out of the constituent parts of the former soviet union  fashioned its own citizenship legislation.


thus, politically freighted decisions concerning  membership were simultaneously underway in multiple new states.
this was compounded  by the fact that some states, such as estonia, viewed themselves as regaining their pre- existing sovereignty after decades of foreign occupation.


from this perspective, they were  not new states, but already established states reasserting the terms of membership in their  polity.
60    in contrast to haile, stserba was not stripped of her citizenship by government decree.


instead,  she  and  other  residents  whose  families  had  not  been  citizens  of  estonia  prior  to the soviet takeover in 1940, faced a naturalization process that included a language  requirement.
the  language  requirement  clearly  placed  a  burden  on  the  portion  of  the  resident population who did not speak estonian, but, as opposed to the ethiopian decree  withdrawing citizenship from ethnic eritreans, residents in estonia were eligible to seek  naturalization,  and  thousands  of  ethnic  russians  successfully  naturalized.


these  and  other  aspects  of  the  dissolution  of  the  soviet  union  and  the  consequent  developments  in citizenship law in successor (or reestablished) states made the estonia circumstances  markedly different from the wartime decrees in ethiopia and eritrea.
nonetheless,  different  though  they  are,  both  the  haile  and  stserba  opinions  agree  that  denationalization on ethnic grounds that results in statelessness should lead to a presumption  of persecution.


these opinions do, however, leave many unanswered questions as to when  statelessness does not constitute persecution, and more generally, as to the intersections   60  this is not necessarily to agree with actions taken by estonia, but to provide a perspective on the legal  steps the government of estonia took.
155  the intersection of statelessness and refugee protection in us asylum policyof statelessness and refugee law.


the stserba and haile courts at times characterize the  situations as denationalizations, or deprivations of already acquired citizenship.
is this an  appropriate  framework  for  analyzing  claims  that  arise  when  one  country  dissolves  and  new countries, with new citizenship legislation, come into existence?


more fundamentally,  does the analysis of whether statelessness constitutes persecution depend on whether the  government has affirmatively acted to remove citizenship?
or is a governments failure to  act to confer citizenship sufficient to create a presumption of persecution?


dual (or multiple) nationality is another factor that may affect the analysis.
if a government  strips citizenship from a group of residents, some of whom are left stateless and some  of  whom  are  nationals  of  another  state,  should  the  presumption  of  persecution  come  into play?


would this be a situation in which the presumption of persecution might be  rebutted in some instances (those with another nationality) but not in others (those rendered  stateless)?
61 would it constitute persecution if the state of residence deprives a dual national  of citizenship, when the individual has never visited her other state of citizenship?


if this  individual cannot speak the language of the second country and has no economic prospects  there, should we view her as effectively stateless despite her formal claim to another states  citizenship?
taking this line of inquiry one step further, should it matter to the analysis of statelessness  as persecution if the individual deprived of citizenship has the ability to acquire citizenship  in another state through a spouse or parent?


for example, would it be relevant if stserba  could acquire russian citizenship based on her long-term marriage to a russian citizen?
should the citizenship decisions of parents matter to the analysis of a states deprivation  of the citizenship of the child?


was it relevant that hailes parents departed from ethiopia  and  renounced  ethiopian  citizenship  or  was  the  salient  fact  that  ethiopia  removed  the  citizenship of a young man who had neither left the country of his birth nor renounced its  citizenship?
another set of concerns arises when naturalization laws have a disproportionate impact  on  minority  populations  and  may  render  substantial  numbers  of  them  stateless.


under  refugee law principles, persecutory actions linked to race, religion, nationality, political  opinion, or membership in a particular social group are proscribed.
should the presumption  of persecution be rebuttable in certain historic and political settings?


62 in the context of  independence from a colonial power, would it constitute persecution if citizenship laws   61  the 1951 convention regards those with multiple nationalities as refugees if they can show they have  a well-founded fear of persecution in each of their states of nationality.
art.


1.
a (2) (2nd para.


).
the  refugee act of 1980 includes different text that supports the conclusion that individuals with more than one  nationality are eligible for refugee status in the united states if they have a well-founded fear of persecution  in one of their countries of nationality.


for a thorough discussion of the text, legislative history, and prior us  practice, see bauer, forthcoming.
62  in the traditional asylum context, us regulations provide that applicants who suffered past persecution shall  be presumed to have a well-founded fear of persecution on the basis of the original harm they experienced.


the government can rebut the presumption by showing a fundamental change in circumstances that removes  the fear of future persecution or by showing that the applicant can avoid future persecution by relocating to  a different part of the applicants country.
8 c.


f.
r.


208.
13(b)(1)(i).


a working group or comprehensive  report on the protection needs of stateless persons in the united states should examine whether or not there  are analogous circumstances in which the us government could present evidence to rebut a presumption that  state action that resulted in statelessness for a portion of the population constituted persecution.
156  journal on migration and human securitydisfavor the colonizers and their descendants?


in response to government policies that  have intentionally aimed to change the ethnic composition of a restive area (consider tibet  under  chinese  rule,  estonia  under  soviet  rule),  would  citizenship  laws  that  disfavored  those groups that had arrived as part of the pacification plan escape the presumption of  persecution?
for example, although the historical details were not developed in stserba, it is  safe to assume that many ethnic estonians believed that the soviet government intentionally  encouraged ethnic russians to move to estonia in order to dilute the percentage of estonian  residents who might oppose communist rule.


would this be relevant in analyzing whether  subsequent estonian citizenship legislation constituted persecution if its requirements were  more  difficult  for  ethnic  russians  to  satisfy?
this  raises  a  related  question  concerning  citizenship  laws  that  impose  language  requirements.


generally  viewed  as  a  legitimate  eligibility factor for those seeking naturalization,63 do language requirements constitute  persecution when applied to lifelong residents?
would it matter if the language test was  imposed in the context of succession of states?


or that the disfavored group was entitled to  citizenship elsewhere?
there are many additional and pressing questions at the intersection of refugee law and  statelessness  that  the  facts  of  the  haile  and  stserba  cases  did  not  raise.


what  happens  when longtime stateless residents lose their jobs and, as a consequence, their residence  permits?
in what circumstances might this constitute persecution?


if a state cannot expel  a  stateless  person,  does  living  without  rights  under  the  perpetual  threat  of  deportation  constitute persecution?
conversely, if a stateless person is temporarily outside her state  of long-term residence, are there circumstances in which refusal to re-admit her amounts  to persecution?


these and similar scenarios have arisen with troubling consequences in  the middle east and asia in recent years.
64 they alert us to the context-specific nature of  persecution, and the myriad forms that it can take.


they also guarantee that, with more  than 10 million stateless individuals in the world today, we are likely to confront many  circumstances when state action and inaction regarding stateless persons are linked to race,  religion, nationality, political opinion, or membership in a particular social group and are  presumptively persecutory.
us law:  other protection for statelessness although  statelessness  may  frequently  arise  in  the  context  of  persecution,  there  are  instances when the stateless do not fear persecution.


in such situations, us asylum policy  does not protect the stateless.
nonetheless, these persons may be unable to return to their  country of former residence; other countries are unlikely to accept them.


as a result, they  are effectively stranded.
without asylum or some form of lawful immigration status, they   63  e.


g.
, us naturalization law requires applicants to demonstrate an understanding of the english language,  including an ability to read, write, and speak words in ordinary usage in the english language.


ina 312(a).
64  for the us perspective that the refusal to readmit stateless palestinians can constitute persecution, see  david  a.


martin,  general  counsel,  us  immigration  and  naturalization  service  (ins),  legal  opinion,  october 27, 1995: the expulsion of or denial of reentry to a stateless palestinian .
.


.
by his country of last  habitual residence may result in such serious violations of the applicants basic human rights as to constitute  persecution.


whether such an asylum applicant can establish that he has been persecuted will depend on the  particular circumstances of each case.
if he does establish [persecution] because of his national origin as a  palestinian, or because of another protected ground, he may qualify as a refugee under united states law.


157  the intersection of statelessness and refugee protection in us asylum policyremain in limbo.
65   it is estimated that approximately 4,000 people fall into this category in the united states.


66   many of them have applied for asylum and for protection under the convention against  torture, but have not succeeded in their claims (acer and magner 2013).
us government  statistics  present  a  snapshot  of  the  situation.


between  2005  and  2010,  628  stateless  applicants filed affirmative asylum claims with the us asylum office.
of this number, 283  received asylum, 359 were referred to immigration court where an immigration judge would  evaluate their claim, and 23 were denied asylum (uscis asylum division as reported in  unhcr  2012c,  22).


during  the  same  period,  the  us  immigration courts  reported  that  1,087 stateless individuals raised asylum claims as a defense to removal.
of this number,  463 received asylum, 166 were denied asylum, and 295 either relinquished their asylum  claims or received some other form of relief (us department of justice, executive office  for immigration review as reported in unhcr 2012c, 22-23).


anecdotal evidence indicates that many of the stateless in the united states came from the  former yugoslavia and the former soviet union, having fallen into the gaps between the  citizenship laws of the new states after dissolution (unhcr 2012c, 23).
other stateless  people  in  the  united  states  include  ethnic  eritreans  denationalized  by  ethiopia,  as  in  haile.


the recent judicial opinion in the dominican republic retroactively withdrawing  citizenship  from  many  dominicans  of  haitian  descent  may  render  stateless  numerous  members of the dominican diaspora in the united states.
67  the palestinian community in  the united states is another group that may include stateless persons, as palestinians born  in egypt, kuwait, saudi arabia, lebanon, and other countries generally were not granted  citizenship in those states.


stateless individuals who have not filed for asylum or whose protection claims have failed  are caught in the gaps of a world of nation states.
when the united states cannot find a  country to accept them, they are commonly ordered removed but by necessity remain in  the united states, without lawful status and subject to the threat of removal at any time.


current us law contains no provisions to recognize the protection needs of the stateless  in these situations and no means for them to regularize their status.
the typical scenario  is that the united states detains those with final orders of removal for 90 days in order to  accomplish the logistics of their removal.


68 if the person does not leave the united states  within this period, he or she can be released pending removal under a government order  of supervision.
69  these policies  apply to all who cannot be removed in the foreseeable  futurenot just the statelessand require that the individuals continue to try to obtain travel  65  for an overview of statelessness in the western hemisphere, in general, and in the united states, in  particular, see price 2013.


66   renewing  americas  commitment  to  the  refugee  convention:  the  refugee  protection  act  of  2010:  hearing  before  the  senate  committee  on  the  judiciary,  111th  cong.
(2010)  (statement  of  dan  glickman,  president,  refugees  international),  www.


judiciary.
senate.gov/hearings/hearing.


cfm?
id_ e655f9e2809e5476862f735da15dabac.


67  reports indicate that there were approximately 1.
5 million people of dominican descent in the united  states in 2010 (motel and patten 2012).


this number includes all those born in the dominican republic, as  well as those born in the united states or elsewhere who reported one of their ancestries to be dominican  (see migration policy institute 2004).
the number who are also of haitian descent is unknown.


68  see ina  241, 8 u.
s.


c.
1231, detention and removal of aliens ordered removed.


69  ina  241(a)(3).
158  journal on migration and human securitydocuments from other countries, submit to  medical and psychiatric exams, and routinely  report in person to immigration officials.


70 persons subject to an order of supervision may  receive employment authorization,71 but this requires applications, renewals, and annual  processing fees (unhcr 2012c).
these conditions are neither reasonable nor efficient when the individual who cannot be  removed is stateless.


the supervisory orders require futile acts, and they do nothing to  assure public safety.
72 they keep stateless individuals in a temporary and tenuous setting,  though  they  are,  in  effect,  permanently  marooned  in  the  united  states.


those  who  are  stateless are unable to seek family reunification; they are unable to travel outside the united  states for family or other emergencies; and they live in a precarious psychological state as  they must continually justify their situation, which is beyond their control.
some  states,  such  as  hungary,  have  enacted  legislation  specifically  addressed  to  the  protection needs of stateless people within their communities.


73  for example, hungarys  immigration  law  provides  protection  to  stateless  residents  and  establishes  a  procedure  through which they can apply to the office of immigration and nationality for determination  that they are entitled to legal status (gyulai 2010).
74 those determined to be stateless have  the right to obtain a humanitarian residence permit, travel documents, basic public health  care services, and free public elementary and secondary education.


75  they are eligible for  work permits, although these may be difficult to obtain, and to seek family reunification  for immediate relatives.
76 proposed  legislation  in  the  united  states  would  accomplish  similar  goals.


the  comprehensive immigration reform bill, s.
744, passed by the senate in june 2013 included  provisions creating a pathway for stateless individuals in the united states to regularize  their situation.


77 the secretary of homeland security, in consultation with the secretary  of  state,  could  designate  certain  groups  of  individuals  as  stateless  persons.
78  stateless  persons would be eligible for discretionary protection known as conditional lawful status.


79  while in conditional status, they would receive authorization to work, travel documents  that would allow them to be readmitted to the united states, and their spouse and minor   70  8 c.
f.


r.
241.


13(h).
71  8 c.


f.
r.


241.
13(h)(3).


72  see gary mead, memorandum on ice reporting guidance, august 23, 2012, concerning the use of  discretion on reporting requirements for noncitizens with final orders of removal.
this policy may reduce the  onerousness of the supervisory orders, but will not cure the heart of the problem with regard to the stateless,  which is the futility of treating them as if the circumstances preventing their removal will change.


73  procedures to determine statelessness exist in france, hungary, italy, latvia, mexico, and spain (unhcr  2012d).
74  only foreigners with legal permission to reside in hungary are eligible to apply for stateless status, which  limits the applicants to between 10 and 50 per year (gyulai 2010, 16, 27).


75  (gyulai 2010, 31-5).
76  (gyulai 2010, 32, 35-6).


77  s.
744, border security, economic opportunity, and immigration modernization act,  3405, proposing  adding new  210a to the immigration and nationality act (ina).


similar legislative provisions were  included in the proposed refugee protection acts of 2010, 2011, 2012, and 2013.
see unhcr 2012c, 28-29.


78  proposed  210a (a)(2).
79  proposed  210a (b)(1).


159  the intersection of statelessness and refugee protection in us asylum policychildren would be able to receive the same status.
80 after one year in conditional status,  and after clearing criminal background investigations and security checks, they would be  eligible for lawful permanent residence in the united states.


81 ultimately, they would be  able to apply for naturalization so they could become us citizens.
82 those who renounced  their citizenship or knowingly let it lapse in order to become stateless would be ineligible  for this relief.


83   the department of homeland security realizes that the lack of a mechanism to deal with  stateless persons whom the united states cannot remove is a problem.
it has indicated it  would favor legislative or regulatory changes to address this situation (acer and magner  2013).


but,  with  immigration  reform  legislation  effectively  stalled,  other  avenues  of  improving us protection policy need to be explored.
conclusion this  complex  and  under-studied  area  needs  careful  and  systematic  attention.


thus  far,  the issues have surfaced sporadically and haphazardly.
judges and government officials,  dependent on the specific situations and resources of individual litigants, have struggled to  respond to the protection needs of those in front of them.


under the existing legal framework, the stateless can be divided into two major groups:  (1)  those with a fear of persecution who are eligible for refugee protection and asylum in the  united states, and (2) those who fall outside the current asylum policy of the united states.
within the first category, those who become stateless via denationalization decrees appear  to fit more easily within the refugee paradigm and may be entitled to a presumption of past  persecution because these governmental acts typically stigmatize entire vulnerable groups  based on ethnic, religious, or political animus.


those who become stateless as a result  of the dissolution of states, when the causal link to discriminatory government action is  indirect or absent, might be treated differently.
the specter of ethnicity-based legislation in  successor states, however, suggests that they, too, should warrant a rebuttable presumption  of the need for protection.


the instances in which people are born into statelessness, due to the operation of the jus  sanguinis laws of the states of which their parents are citizens or due to a failure to have been  registered at birth may not warrant a presumption of persecution, but may still fall within  the persecution paradigm.
individuals born stateless or who become stateless by marriage  are likely to be members of vulnerable populations that endure discriminatory treatment.


depending  on  their  circumstances,  they  may  have  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution.
news reports of the refusal of the april 2014 myanmar census to allow the 1.


3 million  rohingya muslims to identify themselves as rohingya rather than bengali (implying  that these multi-generational residents are not citizens of myanmar but unlawful migrants  from neighboring bangladesh), are a reminder that the protection needs of the stateless   80  proposed  210a (b)(5) - (7).
81  proposed  210a (c).


82  ina  316(a).
the naturalization requirements include five years of continuous residence in the united  states after being lawfully admitted for permanent residence.


83  proposed  210a (b)(1)(c).
160  journal on migration and human securityare ongoing (associated press 2014).


violent attacks against the rohingya in myanmar in  the past two years, leaving almost 300 dead and forcing 280,000 to flee, demonstrate that  persecution on account of religion and nationality continues to afflict stateless populations  (ibid.
).


despite the far too many stateless individuals who face persecution or severe harm, not all  of them do.
this second group of stateless people, though they do not qualify as refugees,  remains  exceedingly  vulnerable.


their  inability  to  procure  the  protection  of  any  state  condemns them to a precarious existence in the united states.
a major problem in generating solutions is the dearth of information on the dimensions  of the problem.


at this point, no one knows exactly how many stateless individuals there  are in the united states.
nor is there reliable information on the countries from which  they  came,  the  circumstances  through  which  they  became  stateless,  or  any  protection  alternatives which they may be able to pursue.


rather than relying on incremental case  law developments and ad hoc regulatory fixes, there should be a serious and sustained  evaluation  of  the  protection  needs  of  the  stateless  in  the  united  states.
the  us  state  department should commission a report on the size and scope of the protection gap in the  united states and develop legislative, regulatory, and other policy guidance concerning  statelessness claims.


there is precedent for this approach in the 2004 state department  study  of  the  us  refugee  resettlement  program  that  led  to  an  exhaustive  report  with  an  array of legislative and administrative reforms to improve the refugee admissions system  (martin 2005).
another  possibility  is  to  convene  a  working  group  to  examine  the  issues  related  to  statelessness.


the  us  task  force  on  refugee  women  overseas  provides  a  useful  model.
the working group, coordinated by the secretary of state in conjunction with the attorney  general and the department of homeland security, surveyed the potential protection gaps  involving women at refugee camps overseas.


the task forces work, which involved careful  review of international and national law, as well as investigation of the legal, practical, and  cultural challenges encountered by a particular population seeking protection, resulted in a  nine-page set of gender guidelines for overseas refugee processing (weiss 2001).
a task force or a commissioned report is warranted in order to produce guidance on a range  of statelessness issues.


in addition to developing an empirical basis for understanding the  needs, one or both of these approaches could consider the strengths and weaknesses of  proposed solutions, and could contemplate the manner in which multiple policy changes  might complement each other.
for example, the process could examine the current regulatory  framework for the us asylum policy and the manner in which past persecution triggers a  rebuttable presumption of persecution in the future.


84 it could evaluate whether regulations  should  include  a  similar  presumption  for  those  rendered  stateless  by  denationalization  decrees and for those whose statelessness is a direct result of ethnic discrimination.
a task force or commissioned report could also review the legislation proposed during the  last decade, including provisions included in s.


744, which would regularize the status of  stateless individuals who cannot be removed to other countries.
it would consider what  should be the contours of the regularization process.


how long should it take?
what benefits  84  8 c.


f.
r.


208.
13(b)(1).


161  the intersection of statelessness and refugee protection in us asylum policyshould it entail?
should it be open to all stateless individuals in the united states or only to  those who have filed for asylum but have been rejected?


furthermore, the process could reflect on the need for continuing education for government  personnel  who  encounter  stateless  individuals.
asylum  officers,  immigration  judges,  members of the bia and other public officials currently receive training concerning the  refugee  law  developments  and  country  conditions.


85 they  could  no  doubt  benefit  from  additional sustained attention to the complex topic of statelessness.
they need to understand  the protection needs of stateless individuals and to be aware of the possible avenues of  protection available under us law.


in  addition,  future  scholarly  research  and  litigation  should  explore  more  deeply  the  ramifications  of  statelessness.
these  efforts,  in  tandem  with  government  measures  to  acknowledge and ameliorate the difficulties facing stateless individuals in the united states,  can help create a humane approach for the future.


the stateless were largely invisible in  the human rights developments in the last half of the twentieth century.
the dawn of the  twenty-first century should begin to shine light on this phenomenon and its human and  legal implications.


