the end of the deterrence  paradigm?
future directions for  global refugee policy  thomas gammeltoft-hansen  raoul wallenberg institute of human rights and humanitarian law  nikolas f.


tan  aarhus university and danish institute for human rights  executive summary asylum seekers and refugees continue to face serious obstacles in their  efforts to access asylum.
some of these obstacles are inherent to irregular  migration, including dangerous border crossings and the risk of exploitation.


yet, refugees also face state-made obstacles in the form of sophisticated  migration  control  measures.
as  a  result,  refugees  are  routinely  denied  access  to  asylum  as  developed  states  close  their  borders  in  the  hope  of  shifting the flow of asylum seekers to neighboring countries.


restrictive migration control policies are today the primary, some might  say  only,  response  of  the  developed  world  to  rising  numbers  of  asylum  seekers and refugees.
this has produced a distorted refugee regime both in  europe and globally  a regime fundamentally based on the principle of  deterrence rather than human rights protection.


while the vast majority  of european states still formally laud the international legal framework to  protect refugees, most of these countries simultaneously do everything in  their power to exclude those fleeing international protection and offer only a  minimalist engagement to assist those countries hosting the largest number  of refugees.
by deterring or blocking onward movement for refugees, an  even larger burden is placed upon these host countries.


today, 86 percent  of the worlds refugees reside in a low- or middle-income country, against  70 percent 20 years ago (edwards 2016; unhcr 2015, 15).
the humanitarian consequences of this approach are becoming increasingly  clear.


last year more than 5,000 migrants and refugees were registered  dead or missing in the mediterranean (iom 2016).
a record number, this  makes the mediterranean account for more than two-thirds of all registered  migrant fatalities worldwide (iom 2016).


many more asylum seekers are  subjected  to  various  forms  of  violence  and  abuse  during  the  migratory  process as a result of their inherently vulnerable and clandestine position.
as  the  industry  facilitating  irregular  migration  grows,  unfortunately  so  too do attempts to exploit migrants and refugees by smugglers, criminal    2017 by the center for migration studies of new york.


all rights reserved.
jmhs volume 5 number 1 (2017): 28-56networks,  governments,  or  members  of  local  communities  (gammeltoft- hansen and nyberg srensen 2013).


the deterrence paradigm can be understood as a particular instantiation of  the global refugee protection regime.
it shows how deterrence policies have  come to dominate responses to asylum seekers arriving in developed states,  and how such policies have continued to develop in response to changes  in migration patterns as well as legal impositions.


the dominance of the  deterrence paradigm also explains the continued reliance on deterrence as  a response to the most recent crisis, despite continued calls from scholars  and civil society for a more protection-oriented and sustainable response.
the paper argues that the current crisis, more than a crisis in terms of  refugee numbers and global protection capacity, should be seen a crisis  in  terms  of  the  institutionalized  responses  so  far  pursued  by  states.


deterrence policies are being increasingly challenged, both by developments  in international law and by less wealthy states left to shoulder the vast  majority of the worlds refugees.
at the same time, recent events suggest  that  deterrence  policies  may  not  remain  an  effective  tool  to  prevent  secondary  movement  of  refugees  in  the  face  of  rising  global  protection  needs, while deterrence involves increasing direct and indirect costs for  the states involved.


the present situation may thus be characterized as, or at least approaching,  a period of paradigm crisis, and we may be seeing the beginning of the end  for deterrence as a dominant policy paradigm in regard to global refugee  policy.
in its place, a range of more or less developed alternative policy  frameworks are currently competing, though so far none of them appear  to have gained sufficient traction to initiate an actual paradigm shift in  terms of global refugee policy.


nonetheless, recognizing this as a case of  possible paradigm change may help guide and structure this process.
in  particular, any successful new policy approach would have to address the  fundamental challenges facing the old paradigm.


the paper proceeds in four parts.
firstly, it traces the rise of the deterrence  paradigm following the end of the cold war and the demise of ideologically  driven refugee protection on the part of states in the global north.


the  past  30  years  have  seen  the  introduction  and  dynamic  development  of  manifold  deterrence  policies  to  stymie  the  irregular  arrival  of  asylum  seekers and migrants.
this array of measures is explored in the second part  of the paper through a typology of five current practices that today make  up normal policymaking within the deterrence regime.


third, the paper  argues that the current paradigm is under threat, facing challenges to its  legality from within refugee and human rights law; to its sustainability due  to the increasing unhappiness of refugee-hosting states with current levels  of burden-sharing; and to its effectiveness as direct and indirect costs  of maintaining the regime mount.
finally, the paper puts forward three  core principles that can lay the groundwork in the event of a paradigm   29  the end of the deterrence paradigm?


shift:  respect  for  international  refugee  law;  meaningful  burden-sharing;  and a broader notion of refugee protection that encompasses livelihoods  and increased preparedness in anticipation of future refugee flows.
i.


the rise of the deterrence paradigm the cornerstone of the current refugee regime, the 1951 convention relating to the status  of  refugees  (the  1951  refugee  convention),  emerged  in  the  aftermath  of  wwii.
it  established a legal regime that, despite its obvious shortcomings,1 extended a core set of  individual  rights  for  political  refugees.


during  the  cold war,  international  refugee  law  came to play a crucial role in legitimizing the politics of the west (gibney and hansen  2003; chimni 1998).
in the 1950s and 1960s refugee flows were primarily conceived as  an east to west movement and granting asylum to defectors consequently entailed scoring  ideological points.


this euro-centric approach was gradually abandoned, however, paving  the way for regional instruments and the 1967 protocol relating to the status of refugees  (the 1967 protocol) lifting the geographical limitation of the 1951 refugee convention.
subsequent developments in legal interpretation have further helped expand the reach and  scope of the convention,2 while broader notions of subsidiary protection have developed  as a matter of general international human rights law (mcadam 2007).


the last three decades, however, have seen an increased politicization of asylum across  both traditional and new asylum countries.
in the 1970s, the welcoming labor immigration  schemes of several european countries were abandoned, thereby cutting off a regular form  of migration.


the proxy wars of the 1980s further created large-scale displacement across  several regions in the global south (unhcr 1995b).
following the end of the cold war,  receiving refugees no longer served an ideological agenda.


at the same time, globalization  has  made  both  knowledge  of  faraway  destinations  and  transcontinental  transportation  more readily available.
and rather than conforming to the traditional image of the singular  bona fide asylum seeker, refugees are increasingly caught up in mixed flows of irregular  migrants, often facilitated by human smugglers specialized in avoiding traditional forms of  border control (gibney and hansen 2003; castles and miller 2003; barnett 2002; zolberg  2001).


in  response,  developed  states  have  introduced  a  range  of  policies  to  deter  or  prevent  migrants and refugees from arriving at their territory or accessing their asylum systems  (hathaway 1992, 40-41).
from the 1980s onwards, states started introducing legal measures  to retroactively exclude refugees who have already arrived at the territory from the procedural  door  (vedsted-hansen  1999b).


the  introduction  of  time  limits  for  submitting  asylum   1   the drafters of the convention shied away from establishing a positive right to seek and be granted asylum  in line with article 14 of the universal declaration of human rights adopted just three years earlier, in favor  of a more limited, negative duty of non-refoulement.
further, the drafters did not set out a positive burden- sharing mechanism, instead calling for international cooperation in recital 4 of the conventions preamble.


2   despite political contestation and lack of strong supervisory institutions, interpretation of the 1951  refugee convention has remained surprisingly dynamic both in terms of its scope ratione personae (e.
g.


,  in regard to persons fleeing gender-related persecution, persecution because of their sexual orientation, or  persecution from non-state actors) and ratione loci (notably in regard to the geographical reach of the non- refoulement principle enshrined in article 33) (goodwin-gill 2014; gammeltoft-hansen 2014a).
30  journal on migration and human securityapplications falls into this category; so do the use of various accelerated procedures based  on first country of arrival, safe country of origin, safe third country, and manifestly  unfounded concepts (hurwitz 2009; gil-bazo 2006; van selm 2001).


other measures have  been aimed at physically preventing refugees from accessing the territory of the asylum state.
in the 1990s the united states interdicted more than 65,000 haitian refugees in international  waters, returning them with no assessment of claims for political asylum (miranda 1995).


through the introduction of carrier sanctions, private airline companies around the world  have similarly been forced to reject boarding to thousands of asylum seekers, who are unlikely  to obtain a visa (unhcr 1991; unhcr 1995a).
the last two decades have further seen  deterrence policies extended to cooperation with transit and origin states.


the bali process  co-chaired  by  australia  and  indonesia  (kneebone  2014),  the  european  unions  global  approach to migration and mobility (european commission 2011), and the american-led  merida initiative (seelke and finklea 2015)3 all embed cooperation on border control in  broader foreign policy arrangements regarding transnational crime, development assistance,  trade privileges, labor immigration quotas, and visa facilitation.
the basic proposition of this article is that this historic development and the wide range  of  deterrence  measures  implemented  today  should  be  collectively  understood  as  a  dominant paradigm for international refugee policy.


4 a policy paradigm may be defined  as a set of shared beliefs, taxonomies, and tools within a community of policymakers that  determine  how  they  perceive,  analyze  and  respond  to  a  given  policy  problem.
5  in  this  case, the community of policymakers is centered around traditional asylum states in the  global  north,  though  a  wider  circle  of  states  have  gradually  adopted  similar  policies.


6  the underlying belief of the deterrence paradigm is that developed states can successfully  insulate themselves from taking on a substantive and proportional responsibility in regard  to refugee protection by speculating on the way that migration control is designed vis-a-vis  international refugee and human rights law (gammeltoft-hansen and hathaway 2015).
7 it  allows wealthy states to have their cake and eat it too: maintaining a formal commitment  to international refugee law, while at the same time largely being spared the associated  burdens (gammeltoft-hansen and hathaway 2015).


several  scholars  have  lamented  the  current  state  of  affairs,  pointing  out  the  obvious  incongruence  between  deterrence  policies  and  the  original  aspirations  of  the  modern  refugee regime.
as noted by louis henkin, who served as the united states representative  3   the merida initiative is a multi-year agreement between the united states and mexico to combat drug  smuggling, transnational crime, and illegal immigration (seelke and finklea 2015).


4   the concept of paradigm in this context is principally derived from thomas kuhn (kuhn and hacking  2012) and subsequent work translating his work into the field of public policy (hall 1993; hogan and  howlett, eds.
2015).


5   or, in peter halls words, a framework of ideas and standards that specifies not only the goals of policy  and the kind of instruments that can be used to attain them, but also the very nature of the problems they are  meant to be addressing (1993).
6   for examples see section ii.


transit and origin states may, for obvious reasons, not necessarily share  the beliefs and policy ambition of sponsoring states, but nonetheless decide to engage in cooperative  deterrence mechanisms due to the financial or other benefits or negative conditionalities involved (lavenex  2006; geddes 2009).
at the same time, entering into such arrangements often lead transit states to adopt  deterrence policies of their own in order to avoid becoming the cul-de-sac for asylum flows (byrne, noll,  and vedsted-hansen 2002).


7   see further, koh (1994).
31  the end of the deterrence paradigm?


during the drafting of the 1951 refugee convention, in regard to the haitian interdiction  program: it is incredible that states that had agreed not to force any human being back into  the hands of his/her oppressors intended to leave themselves  and each other  free to  reach out beyond the territory to seize a refugee and to return him/her to the country from  which he sought to escape (henkin 1993, 1).
yet, for a long time the deterrence paradigm  has  served  as  a  crude  but  effective  solution  to  the  growing  schism  between  the  liberal  values and self-protective stance of the developed world in regard to refugee protection.


while there is no doubt that deterrence policies challenge core principles of international  refugee and human rights law,8 the deterrence paradigm is not premised on a rejection  of  international  law  as  such  (gammeltoft-hansen  2014b).
while  deterrence  policies  may  be  borne  out  of  a  sense  of  frustration  with  the  limits  that  international  law  place  upon states in their pursuit of more effective immigration control,9 few states have so far  directly challenged international refugee law or taken steps to withdraw from the 1951  refugee convention or other core human rights instruments protecting refugees.


10 various  factors, both domestic and international, may explain why states have remained reluctant  to  withdraw  or  reform  international  refugee  law  (gammeltoft-hansen  and  hathaway  2015).
fundamentally, the logic of deterrence is premised on a concurrent commitment of  less developed states towards refugee protection, where the vast majority of the worlds  refugees currently reside.


international refugee law serves as an important tool to ensure  the continued commitment of those states, and it is difficult to imagine any of the worlds  top refugee hosting countries agreeing to a new legal instrument that does not address  this gross disparity in terms of global burden-sharing.
in other words, although developed  states are increasingly concerned about the commitment that international refugee law is  placing upon them, receding from or renegotiating the current legal framework is hardly in  these states best interest.


within the deterrence paradigm, international refugee law has thus so far remained a set  of shared rules directly or indirectly guiding action (kuhn and hacking 2012, 43).
yet,  the tension between these normative commitments and differing political interests, leads  states to develop policies that work at the fringes or in the interstices of international law in  order to recoup sovereign maneuverability.


deterrence policies may in that sense be seen  as examples of creative legal thinking (gammeltoft-hansen 2014a), as states seek to  exploit interpretative uncertainties, competing legal regimes or new modes of governance  in order to limit, shift, or circumvent legal obligations otherwise owed.
ii.


normal policymaking in the deterrence paradigm a  key  benefit  of  understanding  deterrence  as  a  policy  paradigm  is  that  it  allows  us  to  understand  how  different  kinds  of  policy  developments  are  enacted  and  relate  to  each  other.
despite several challenges to the effectiveness and viability of specific deterrence   8   for an overview, see gammeltoft-hansen (2011).


9   as hathaway bluntly concludes, the legal duty to protect refugees is understood to be neither in the  national interest of most states, nor a fairly apportioned collective responsibility (2005, 1000).
10   though, more recently, both the australian and the danish prime ministers have openly suggested that the  convention ought to be renegotiated.


32  journal on migration and human securitymeasures,11 policymaking in this area has so far continued without any perceived need to  revise the fundamental beliefs and modus operandi of the deterrence paradigm.
rather,  deterrence policies may be seen to dynamically develop in response to external impositions.


there are at least three external factors driving policymaking in the deterrence paradigm.
firstly, certain forms of deterrence have been rendered ineffective by changes in migratory  patterns and technologies.


just as the original set of deterrence policies were developed  in response to the jet age asylum seeker, the sophistication of those who help facilitate  irregular migration has prompted new policy developments.
human smuggling is today  a  billion-dollar  industry  with  the  capacity  to  produce  high-quality  forged  documents,  bribe immigration officials, develop new smuggling methods, or quickly adapt migration  routes (gammeltoft-hansen and nyberg sorensen, eds.


2013).
this, in turn, has prompted  not only developments in border control technology and strategies, but also an increased  criminalization and targeting of human smugglers as part of deterrence policies (mitsilegas  2014; legomsky 2007, 679; stumpf 2006, 367).


a second driver has been developments in international refugee and human rights law.
many of the first generation deterrence policies have, even if sometimes very belatedly,  been successfully challenged, forcing states to abandon or substantially adjust their policies.


both national and regional case law has firmly established that states cannot delimit the  geographical scope of obligations under international law at will by excising parts of their  territory or designating so-called international zones.
12 while measures to exclude access  to asylum by use of safe third countries notions and time limits have hardly disappeared,  judicial impositions have forced several states to moderate the implementation of such  policies.


13  in  europe,  an  important  blow  against  the  dublin  system  was  struck  by  the  european  court  of  human  rights  in  the  mss  case  and  the  follow-up  decision  by  the  european court of justice rejecting government claims that member states lack the ability  to assess other states compliance with fundamental rights and refugee protection.
14  third,  and  finally,  policy  innovation  has  been  partly  driven  by  mutual  inspiration  in  a  dynamic  that  may  be  best  understood  as  a  form  of  policy  transfer  (ghezelbash  2014).


a key example of the transplant of policies from one developed state to another is the  sequential spread of offshore processing in third states.
in the 1980s, the united states  began processing asylum claims in guantanamo bay, an approach emulated by australia  under the pacific solution in 2001 and later operation sovereign borders (dastyari 2007).


today, of course, there is heated debate in europe whether to adopt such a model, a debate  that has risen to the surface at various times since the united kingdom put forward its  new vision for refugees proposal in 2003 (uk home office 2003).
this  does  not  mean  that  deterrence  policies  are  implemented  uniformly  across  states.


both physical and legal geography may be seen to play a major role in determining which  11   or in kuhns terminology, anomalies (kuhn and hacking 2012, 52).
12    amuur  v.


france,  no.
19776/92,  echr  1999;  plaintiff  m61  and  plaintiff  m69  v.


commonwealth  of  australia [2010] hca 41.
and more generally catan and others v.


moldova and russia, no.
43370/04,  8252/05 and 18454/06, echr 2012.


13   jabari v.
turkey, no.


40035/98, echr 2000; i.
m v.


france, no.
9152/09, echr 2012.


14   mss v.
belgium and greece, no.


30696/09, echr 2011; ns v.
secretary for the home department and  me et al v refugee applications commissioner and minister for justice, equality and law reform, case  c-411/10 and c-493/10, ecj 2011.


see further t.
i.


v.
united kingdom, no.


43844/98, echr 2000.
33  the end of the deterrence paradigm?


deterrence policies are favored where.
for instance, the united states and australia have  long exploited their extensive maritime borders to enact interdiction on the high seas and  detention on nearby islands that are either part of the sovereign state or the territory of  other states (legomsky 2006, 677; dastyari 2015; mountz 2011, 118-28; magner 2004,  53; billings 2013, 279).


european states have also enacted maritime migration control,  though less successfully, legally bound as they are by the european convention on human  rights and geographically bound by alternative overland migration routes (frontex 2016).
15  within the european union, geography also plays a significant role, with outlying states  seemingly  favoring  intensified  border  management,  and  more  developed  welfare  states  often implementing indirect deterrence measures to push asylum flows toward neighboring  countries.


more  generally,  the  last  few  years  seem  to  have  fueled  a  competition-like  environment, especially among eu states, to introduce increasingly draconian measures,  including novel types of deterrence adding to the traditional arsenal.
deterrence states have so far responded to the recent surge in refugee numbers and the  sharp increase in secondary movement by treating this as normal policymaking, requiring  only incremental adjustments to existing policies, or policy innovations still adhering to  the foundational beliefs of the existing paradigm.


16 many of the more recent policies thus  move beyond or expand on existing policies, opening new and challenging legal questions,  often not directly covered by international refugee law.
consequently, the present article  deliberately takes a broader view of deterrence than most previous work in this area in an  effort to demonstrate the internal logic of the paradigm (hathaway 1992; vedsted-hansen  1999a; gammeltoft-hansen 2011).


under this broader view, current deterrence policies  may be seen to fall into five main categories: 1) non-admission policies limiting access to  asylum procedures, 2) non-arrival measures preventing access to the territory of asylum  states through migration control, 3) offshore asylum processing and relocation of refugees  to third countries, 4) criminalization of irregular migration and human smuggling, and 5)  indirect deterrence measures intended to make the asylum country less attractive.
a.


non-admission  a  traditional  but  still  prevalent  form  of  deterrence  encompasses  legal  measures  to  retroactively exclude refugees who have already arrived at the territory, e.
g.


, expedited  procedures based on safe third country or other concepts (vedsted-hansen 1999b).
the  common  purpose  of  these  policies  is  to  restrict  access  to  or  cut  short  ordinary  asylum  procedures,  targeting  specific  categories  of  refugees  based  on  their  nationality,  claim,  manner of entry, or arrival point.


the introduction of such expedited procedures may be  justified where states are faced with large number of irregular migrants who are unlikely to  qualify for international protection, and where sufficient safeguards exist to allow individual  asylum seekers the opportunity to rebut the presumption of safety, redirecting such cases  into a full and comprehensive asylum procedure.
yet, several states apply these procedures  in response to mass influx situations or for groups of asylum seekers where the underlying  presumptions of safety are clearly not fulfilled.


hungary has thus declared all asylum claims  from persons crossing the border from serbia  the transit route for 99 percent of refugees   15   hirsi jamaa and others v.
italy, no.


27765/09, echr 2012.
16   what kuhn refers to as first order and second order change (kuhn and hacking 2012; hall 1993, 280).


34  journal on migration and human securityinto hungary  inadmissible, notwithstanding the concern of human rights organizations  (reuters 2015; unhcr 2012c; hungarian helsinki committee 2011).
asylum seekers  crossing the us-mexico border are dealt with under the expedited removal procedure,  during which persons are detained and removed unless they pass a credible fear test.


the  threshold for this initial and summary interview was reportedly raised in 2014 and only  a small fraction of central american asylum claims appear to be examined on the merits  (hrw 2014; campoy 2014).
south africa, which has consistently received the highest  number of asylum applications in africa, has refused refugee status because asylum seekers  have passed through a safe country en route (hathaway 2014; unhcr 2015, 29).


all of  these policies give rise to the risk of direct and indirect refoulement in the absence of access  to an asylum procedure meeting international standards (unhcr 2011).
the recently concluded arrangement between the european union and turkey is a further  example  of  non-admission.


asylum  seekers  arriving  in  greece  are  returned  without  examination of their claims of refugee status on the basis that turkey is a safe third country.
in exchange, the european union has agreed to speed up accession talks, accelerate the  implementation of the visa liberalization, provide a total of 3 billion euros to assist turkey  in providing refugee protection for syrian refugees, and provide resettlement spaces equal  to the number of refugees returned.


17   b.
non-arrival  measures  preventing  refugees  from  reaching  the  territory  of  asylum  states  are  another,  and  increasingly  preferred,  form  of  deterrence.


several  other  states  have  followed  the  american lead to implement various forms of maritime interdiction.
in the asia pacific,  thailand,  malaysia,  and  indonesia  recently  pushed  back  boats  carrying  rohingya  and  bangladeshi  migrants  and  asylum  seekers  in  the  bay  of  bengal  and  the andaman  sea  (hrw 2015; tisdall 2015), before agreeing to provide temporary protection to rohingya  asylum seekers.


australia has turned back 28 boats to sri lanka, indonesia, and vietnam  since 2013 (minister for immigration and border protection 2016).
in  europe,  migration  control  on  the  high  seas  has  been  carried  out  both  by  individual  member  states  and  as  part  of  joint  maritime  operations  coordinated  by  the  eu  border  agency,  frontex.


whereas  recent  eu  guidelines  affirm  the  applicability  of  the  non- refoulement principle to persons intercepted on the high sea,18 member states practices  have varied.
italian authorities thus intercepted and directly returned at least 850 persons  in 2009, despite the identification of asylum seekers and bona fide refugees among those  returned (lunita 2010; unhcr 2009).


from  the  still  widespread  use  of  carrier  sanctions,  private  companies  and  corporations  today perform a wider set of roles in regard to migration control.
the use of private actors  for the purposes of border controls, surveillance technology, and immigration detention   17   the agreement builds on the eu-turkey joint action plan of october 15, 2015.


18   regulation (eu) no.
656/2014 of the european parliament and of the council of may 15, 2014 establishing  rules for the surveillance of the external sea borders in the context of operational cooperation coordinated by  the european agency for the management of operational cooperation at the external borders of the member  states of the european union.


35  the end of the deterrence paradigm?
and transportation is a key feature of states deterrence policies (gammeltoft-hansen 2015;  bloom 2015).


sweden, for example, in 2016 extended carrier sanctions to train and ferry  companies operating inside the schengen area as a means to restrict the otherwise free  movement of refugees towards the country.
19  perhaps the most significant trend has been the growth of bilateral and regional agreements  to prevent onwards movement for migrants and refugees.


20 in the asia pacific, australia  has  established  formal  or  informal  bilateral  agreements  with  regional  states,  including  sri lanka, malaysia, and indonesia.
these arrangements include joint patrols, disruption  of  people  smuggling  operations,  and  funding  of  immigration  detention  networks  (tan  2016).


the above-mentioned bali process agenda has often been dominated by migration  control, framing refugees within a security/border control paradigm (kneebone 2016).
in  north america, the united states funds a range of migration control activities in mexico,  extending to patrol boats and migration management databases.


mexico is thus a buffer  state for guatemalan and honduran asylum seekers attempting to reach the united states  (fitzgerald, forthcoming).
in the european context, the now-defunct italy-libya treaty of  friendship, partnership, and cooperation is perhaps the most well-known case of bilateral  cooperation in this area.


a range of other bilateral agreements are currently in place, however,  including between spain and a range of north african states, such as morocco, senegal,  and mauritania (fra 2012).
many of these arrangements involve partner countries with  lacking or clearly insufficient asylum systems.


21  c.
offshore asylum processing and protection elsewhere  a third form of deterrence involves asylum processing or refugee protection in third states.


recent proposals in developed states have called for the establishment of offshore asylum  camps, recalling the us processing of asylum seekers in guantanamo bay in the 1980s.
australia  resumed  offshore  processing  of  asylum  claims  cooperation  with  nauru  and  papua new guinea in 2012, reviving a key plank of the pacific solution first introduced in  2001 (billings 2013; grattan 2012).


approximately 1500 asylum seekers are currently in  australian-funded detention or accommodation in these two states (dipb 2017).
a range of  human rights issues have arisen in offshore detention.


the committee against torture has  reported conditions of overcrowding, inadequate health care and ill-treatment causing  serious physical and mental pain and suffering (cat 2014).
australia has further entered  into a refugee resettlement deal with cambodia.


in exchange for development assistance,  cambodia offers permanent resettlement to people found to be refugees on nauru (dfat  19   in addition to blocking onwards travel for refugees en route, such measures may be challenged as a matter  of eu law.
20   for an in-depth examination of this development see gammeltoft-hansen and hathaway (2015).


21   although turkey has recently adopted domestic legislation providing for a national asylum system,  reports point to continued shortcomings in terms of both asylum procedures and key rights related to  refugee protection (amnesty international 2016).
as a matter of international law, turkey further maintains  a geographical limitation to the 1967 protocol, and is not obliged to apply the 1951 refugee convention to  non-european refugees.


recent eu plans to re-establish migration control cooperation with north african  countries raise even more significant issues.
in 2012, the european court of human rights thus held  that italy had violated the non-refoulement principle as well as the prohibition on collective expulsion by  returning asylum seekers to libya, despite its clear track record of abuse, detention, and forced return of  refugees in hirsi jamaa and others v.


italy, no.
27765/09, echr 2012.


36  journal on migration and human security2014).
such offshore asylum processing and resettlement set disturbing precedents for the  mistreatment of asylum seekers and refugees forcibly relocated away from the state where  they sought protection.


d.
criminalization  the marked increase in mixed migration flows in recent years has brought intense focus on  criminalizing both irregular migration and those facilitating the process (mitsilegas 2014;  legomsky 2007, 679; stumpf 2006, 367).


the non-arrival policies outlined above leave  the vast majority of refugees with no choice but to turn to migrant smugglers and irregular  entry in order to access asylum states.
as a result, migrant smuggling is today a multi-billion  industry with ties to established and increasingly sophisticated criminal networks (kyle  and koslowski, eds.


2001; gammeltoft-hansen and nyberg sorensen, eds.
2013; castles  and miller 2009).


states may have legitimate reasons to combat such criminal activity and  are legally entitled to do so pursuant to the protocol against the smuggling of migrants by  land, sea and air, which promotes cooperation among states parties to prevent and combat  smuggling.
22 yet, the protocol equally underscores that the non-refoulement principle and  other refugee rights must be respected as part of such efforts.


23 moreover, with no legal  migration alternatives available to refugees, such measures may themselves limit access to  asylum.
in  the asia  pacific,  the  bali  process  aims  to  deter  and  combat  migrant  smuggling  and  trafficking networks, with minimal focus on complementary access to asylum (mann 2013;  kneebone 2014).


indeed, in 2015, states in the region initially justified denying access to  asylum to 8,000 migrants with the argument that it would further fuel migrant smuggling.
24  getting third countries to criminalize irregular departure has similarly been a key priority  for the european union.


in morocco, algeria, tunisia, libya, egypt, and turkey, leaving  the country irregularly is punished with a financial fine and/or imprisonment (fra 2013).
criminalization  may  further  extend  to  the  prosecution  of  private  vessels  who  rescue  migrants in distress at sea (mangano 2011).


last, but not least, efforts to combat migrant  smuggling have prompted a growing militarization, utilizing, for example, naval forces,  army equipment, or military techniques for the purpose of migration control (jones and  johnson 2016).
in 2015, the european union thus launched a military operation to seize  and dispose boats used for human smuggling in international waters off the libyan coast25  and,  in  2016,  a  nato  operation  was  commenced  in  the aegean  sea  to  deter  migrant  smuggling from turkey to greece.


there  is  an  inescapable  link  between  these  policies  and  the  rising  number  of  migrant  fatalities and other dangers faced by migrants and refugees forced to employ the services of  smugglers.
an intensification of efforts to combat migrant smuggling may push smugglers  22   protocol against the smuggling of migrants by land, sea and air, supplementing the united nations  convention against transnational organized crime, article 7.


23   protocol against the smuggling of migrants by land, sea and air, supplementing the united nations  convention against transnational organized crime, article 19.
24   australian prime minister tony abbott stated that turning around boats was absolutely necessary if the  scourge of people smuggling is to be beaten (medhora 2015).


25   the operation is provided for by security council resolution 2240 (2015), 7532nd meeting, october 9,  2015.
37  the end of the deterrence paradigm?


to use longer or more dangerous routes, or to depart during periods when weather conditions  are less favorable in order to avoid controls (gammeltoft-hansen and nyberg sorensen,  eds.
2013; brian and laczko, eds.


2014).
similarly, policies to impound maritime vessels  may push smugglers to further overcrowd boats or use inflatable or unseaworthy vessels,  with poor engines and navigation systems, equally increasing the risk to migrants lives.


criminalization and militarization are further likely to prompt more risk-averse responses  from smugglers, who may choose to offload passengers before reaching shore or themselves  abandon the vessels, leaving cargo ships sailing on automatic pilot for europe with no  crew on board (deutsche welle 2015; frontex 2016).
finally, military operations engaging  migrant smuggling vessels on the high seas entail a significant risk of collateral damage  involving migrants and refugees.


26  e.
indirect deterrence measures  a particular trend these past years has been the expansion of indirect deterrence policies,  designed to discourage asylum claims or divert them to other countries.


these measures  may  include  mandatory  detention  policies,  limitations  on  family  reunification,  cuts  to  social  benefits,  granting  more  temporary  or  subsidiary  forms  of  protection,  with  fewer  rights  attached  than  those  afforded  under  the  1951  refugee  convention.
while  such  measures do not restrict access to asylum per se, they often negatively impact other rights  under the convention, including freedom of movement, non-discrimination, and access to  employment, public education, and housing.


and while many such policies do not violate  the letter of international refugee law, they may fall foul of general human rights law.
still  other indirect deterrence measures  such as information campaigns  are not unlawful  at all.


denmark is among the countries which have most openly justified more restrictive asylum  policies by the desire to shift asylum flows away from the country.
through a series of  successive  measures,  denmark  has  thus  managed  to  maintain  a  relatively  low  number  of  asylum  seekers,  especially  compared  to  its  two  neighboring  countries,  sweden  and  germany.


in 2015 a new, tertiary protection status, temporary asylum, was introduced for  persons fleeing generalized violence and armed conflict.
27 under this category, residence  permits are initially granted for one-year periods only, ensuring that cases are regularly  reviewed to assess continued protection needs.


access to family reunification for those  granted temporary asylum is further denied for the first three years of residence, unless  special considerations apply.
28  social benefits for refugees have been cut by 50 percent and childcare support and pensions  for  refugees  graduated  based  on  the  length  of  stay  in  denmark.


29  legislation has  been  adopted granting the police authority to search and seize funds and assets from asylum   26   an internal eu planning document explicitly warned that, non-compliant boarding operations against  smugglers in the presence of migrants has a high risk of collateral damage including the loss of life (rettman  2015).
27   amendment to the danish asylum and immigration statute, law no.


153, february 18, 2015.
28    the  moratorium  on  family  reunification  was  originally  one  year,  but  was  subsequently  extended.


amendment to the danish asylum and immigration statute, law no.
102, february 3, 2016.


29   amendment to the danish asylum and immigration statute, law no.
1000, august 30, 2015.


38  journal on migration and human securityseekers in order to cover costs related to accommodation and other benefits.
30 fees will  similarly  be  introduced  in  connection  with  applications  for  family  reunification  and  permanent residence for refugees.


the latter will further be subject to new requirements  in regard to language and employment, and the waiting period for permanent residence  extended to six years.
many  other  european  countries  have  introduced  similar  policies.


for  example,  despite  a  long-term  commitment  to  liberal  asylum  policy,  sweden  has  recently  implemented  restrictions in regard to family reunification as well as shorter residence permits for refugees.
germany has similarly replaced financial benefits to refugees with coupons to claim food  and clothing items.


countries outside of europe have adopted indirect deterrence measures  as well.
australia, for instance, now issues only temporary protection visas to refugees  who arrive by boat, a status that does not include the right to family reunification (kaldor  centre 2015).


31  delayed  or  protracted  refugee  status  determination processes  may  further  be  used  as  a  deterrent in some instances.
administrative backlogs can be an unfortunate but inevitable  consequence  of  mass  influx  situations.


in  europe,  where  there  were  almost  800,000  outstanding  asylum  applications  in  september  2015  (european asylum  support  office  2015),  backlogs  of  asylum  claims  currently  mirror  levels  of  the  early  1990s  (gibney  1994).
yet,  in  some  countries,  applying  caps  on  the  processing  of  asylum  applications  or restricting access to submit them, appear to be part of a deliberate strategy to deter  asylum applications.


austria thus introduced a cap of 80 asylum applications per day in  2016 (bell 2016).
greece has similarly limited the ability to submit asylum applications  in some periods (unhcr 2012a).


in the pacific, there are undue delays to refugee status  determinations in australian-led detention centers in nauru and papua new guinea, where  first  instance  decisions  take  up  to  18  months  to  hand  down  (unhcr  2013a;  unhcr  2013b; cat 2014; refugee council of australia 2014; karlsen 2015).
mandatory detention of asylum seekers is a widespread practice intended to deter further  arrivals.


european states including greece, macedonia, malta, and hungary have recently  stepped up systematic detention of asylum seekers (global detention project 2015; aida  2015).
australia has long had a policy of mandatory detention of asylum seekers arriving  by boat, and has actively encouraged indonesia to import such a policy (nethery, rafferty- brown, and taylor 2013).


israel places irregular migrants for up to a year at the holot  detention center located in the desert, from which residents are unable to leave (unhcr  2014b).
while asylum seekers may legitimately be detained for identification or security  reasons,  wide-scale  detention  policies  are  not  consistent  with  the  prohibition  against  penalization of illegal entry or stay in article 31 of the 1951 refugee convention.


the  deleterious effect of protracted detention  particularly for children  is well documented  (dudley  et  al.
2012;  robjant,  hassan,  and  katona  2009;  australian  human  rights   30   the authorities may confiscate funds or assets estimated to have a worth above 10,000 krone (approximately  1,350 euros).


according to the guidance note, personal assets with a particular sentimental value, such as  wedding  rings  or  religious  artifacts,  are  exempted.
amendment  to  the  danish asylum  and  immigration  statute, law no.


102, february 3, 2016.
31   migration and maritime powers legislation amendment (resolving the asylum legacy caseload) act  2014.


39  the end of the deterrence paradigm?
commission 2014; international detention coalition n.


d.
).


32 more generally, there is no  evidence that the threat of detention does in fact deter irregular migration (edwards 2011,  iii).
last, but not least, several countries have initiated information campaigns aimed at both  prospective  asylum  seekers  and  those  facilitating  irregular  travel.


thus,  belgium  and  norway have used facebook to dissuade iraqi asylum seekers (pop 2015; the local 2015),  while denmark has taken out advertisements in newspapers in the middle east warning  prospective asylum seekers about its restrictive policies.
33 meanwhile, throughout its own  region, australia has advertised that asylum seekers coming by boat will never be settled  there (parliament of australia 2013).


iii.
paradigm crisis and the end of deterrence?


although deterrence policies continue to flourish and take on new forms, there are signs  indicating that normal policymaking will not suffice for much longer.
not only has the  deterrence paradigm been attacked for its negative humanitarian impact, but it has come  under pressure from several other sides, to the point that its legal foundations, political  stability, and likelihood of long-term effectiveness are all in doubt.


a.
the legal challenge  the first challenge relates to the legal challenges that have and are likely to be brought  against the current range of deterrence policies.


as mentioned above, the majority of current  deterrence policies are based on the premise that developed states can somehow insulate  themselves against responsibility by shifting migration control or the responsibility for  refugee protection to third states.
yet, this idea that states are allowed to do outside their  territory or through others exactly what they have committed themselves to prohibit at  home as a matter of international human rights and refugee law, is becoming increasingly  difficult to uphold.


just as the history of deterrence policies provides several examples  of  successful  legal  challenges  to  overreaching  by  states,  current  developments  in  both  human rights and refugee law are increasingly undercutting attempts by developed states  to insulate themselves from responsibility by shifting it onto others.
the evolving jurisprudence on extraterritorial jurisdiction is an important area that has  helped  rein  in  a  number  of  offshore  deterrence  policies  (gammeltoft-hansen  and  vedsted-hansen, eds.


2016).
in hirsi v.


italy, the grand chamber of the european court  of  human  rights  unanimously  struck  down  the  legality  of  italys  cooperation  scheme  with libya, arguing that pushbacks of refugees on the high seas violated article 3 of the   32   in 2014, unhcr launched beyond detention, a five-year strategy to end the detention of asylum seekers  and refugees with a particular focus on ending detention of children (unhcr 2014a).
unhcrs detention  guidelines outline the legitimate use of detention in the context of asylum, as well as providing alternatives  to detention (unhcr 2012b).


33    the  text  of  the  ad  was  subsequently  criticized  by  the  danish  parliamentary  ombudsman  for  being  misleading, suggesting that the new restrictions apply to all types of refugees.
40  journal on migration and human securityeuropean convention on human rights.


34 the court equally suggested that international  refugee law, notably the principle of non-refoulement, has to be observed when carrying  out  operations  on  the  high  seas.
35  in australia,  a  series  of  high  court  decisions  have  challenged australias policies in terms of access to judicial review for persons applying  for asylum in the offshore zone,36 the relocation of refugees to politically declared safe  third countries,37 and the ability indefinitely to detain persons considered a security risk  and deny them access to asylum procedures.


38  recent  developments  in  general  human  rights  law  have  recognized  the  extraterritorial  application of human rights treaties, especially at the european level.
thus, in al skeini, the  european court of human rights held that human rights law applies in any situation where  a state exercises control and authority over an individual.


39 further, in issa and others  v turkey, the strasbourg court found that responsibility is engaged where persons on the  territory of another state .
.


.
are found to be under the former states authority and control  through its agents operating .


.
.


lawfully or unlawfully.
40 within scholarship, increasing  attention to the establishment of shared responsibility for cooperation-based deterrence  polices is, so to speak, piercing the corporate veil of internationalized migration control  arrangements (gammeltoft-hansen and hathaway 2015; nollkaemper and jacobs 2012;  unga 2001).


such developments in shared state responsibility  be it independent, joint,  or derivative  open up the possibility of holding two or more states responsible for the  violations of primary obligations that occur in the course of deterrence policies.
41  still further developments in human rights law present a challenge to a number of indirect  deterrence  measures.


most  recently,  the  european  court  of  human  rights  in  biao  v.
denmark held that a refusal to grant family reunion amounted to indirect discrimination,  thereby striking a significant blow to denmarks notoriously restrictive policies towards  immigrants in this area.


42 in the pacific context, papua new guineas supreme court has  invalidated  detention  of  asylum  seekers  and  refugees  under  a  bilateral  agreement  with  australia on the basis of the right to liberty set out in papua new guineas constitution.
43   34   judgments of the european court of human rights are binding on the states concerned.


the committee  of ministers of the council of europe is responsible for monitoring the execution of judgments.
35   hirsi jamaa and others v.


italy, no.
27765/09, echr 2012.


36   plaintiff m61 and plaintiff m69 v.
commonwealth of australia [2010] hca 41.


37   plaintiff m70/2011 v minister for immigration and citizenship; plaintiff m106 of 2011 v minister for  immigration and citizenship [2011] hca 32.
in this case, the court adopted a specific interpretation of  the refugee convention to declare australias refugee swap agreement with malaysia invalid.


according  to the effective protection approach, states are obliged to ensure that already accrued rights under the  convention can be guaranteed following transfer to a third country, something previously rejected by courts  in both australia and the united kingdom, arguing that such transfers are merely subject to respect for the  non-refoulement principle.
in response to the judgement, the australian government subsequently announced  its intention to amend the migration act in order to restore the understanding of the third country transfer  provisions of the migration act that existed prior to the high courts decision on 31 august 2011 (minister  for immigration and border protection 2011).


38   plaintiff m47-2012 v director general of security [2012] hca 46.
39   al skeini and others v.


the united kingdom, no.
55721/07, echr 2011.


.
40   no.


31821/96, echr 2004.
41   in relation to derivative responsibility and the law of complicity, see jackson (2015), lanovoy (2015),  and aust 2013).


42   biao v.
denmark, no.


38590/10, echr 2016.
43   namah v pato (minister for foreign affairs and immigrations) and ors [2016] pjsc 13.


41  the end of the deterrence paradigm?
a number of recent deterrence policies may finally be seen to endanger refugee-protective  interpretations  in  regard  to  already  established  areas  of  international  law.


the  recently  concluded  arrangement  between  the  european  union  and  turkey  provides  one  such  example.
that agreement is premised on the definition of turkey as a safe third country  as a matter of both eu and international refugee law.


44 as a form of politics, the eu-turkey  deal represents not only a classic case of placing the cart before the horse  i.
e.


, politically  declaring turkey safe and then subsequently trying to pay to make it so as a matter of fact   but also once again placing greece in the precarious position of having to take the legal- political risk of this strategy on its own, whilst allowing other member states to wait the  outcome of the legal test.
given the number of reports suggesting violations of both the non-refoulement principle and  fundamental shortcomings in the implementation of other refugee rights, legal challenges  seem unavoidable.


in this case domestic judiciaries have moved more swiftly than many  expected.
the greek asylum appeals committee on lesbos has thus ruled turkey unsafe  in a case concerning nine syrian asylum seekers.


following the decisions, however, the  greek government changed the composition of the appeals committee in order to ensure  the continued viability of the eu-turkey deal.
meanwhile, another case has been submitted  to the european court of justice that will be asked to assess greeces application of the eu  asylum procedures directive vis--vis turkey.


of  course,  as  mentioned  above,  current  and  future  legal  challenges  are  a  part  of  the  policymaking landscape of the deterrence paradigm.
in many cases, states simply adapt  their policies and legal challenges may thus indirectly help drive policy innovations and  more varied forms of measures.


nevertheless, the long list of successful legal challenges to  deterrence demonstrates that there are limits on western states in this area and it is highly  likely we will see similar challenges to the most recent suite of deterrence measures via  national and regional courts.
b.


the systemic challenge  the second challenge is political.
looking at the developments over recent years, it is  hard to imagine the current refugee protection regime can survive much longer without  some more meaningful displays of international solidarity.


while the global number of  refugees fluctuates from year to year and is currently at a historic high, deterrence policies  in themselves are a zero-sum game that at best serve to push refugees from one state to  another.
the costs of this competition-style environment in europe is increasingly being  felt, not just by the refugees, but also by member states faced with even more unpredictable  arrival patterns and various negative externalities from the reintroduction of, for example,  border controls (bohmer et al.


2016; european parliament directorate-general for internal  policies 2016, 9).
45  44   article 38 of directive 2013/32/eu of the european parliament and of the council of 26 june 2013 on  common procedures for granting and withdrawing international protection (procedures directive).


45   according to the bertelsmann foundation, the eu-24 would see accumulated gdp losses of 471 billion  euros by 2025 if the schengen agreement was suspended.
the european parliament directorate-general for  internal policies reports that the permanent suspension of the schengen agreement, calculated over a ten- year period, would amount to 230 billion euros.


see also soros (2016).
42  journal on migration and human securitymoreover, as noted at the outset, the deterrence paradigm has placed an additional and  inordinate burden upon major refugee-hosting countries like turkey, lebanon, and jordan.


while the refugee regime is, at least in principle, based on some level of burden-sharing  between  states,  the  deterrence  paradigm  seeks  to  quell,  to  the  greatest  extent  possible,  spontaneous arrivals of asylum seekers at the borders of states in the global north.
as  a result, there exists the real risk that states hosting the bulk of the worlds refugees will  choose to turn their back on the regime, absent the availability of humanitarian assistance  and the release of pressure from refugees bottlenecked in states of transit.


the perception  that different rules apply to the european union and other wealthier states that can simply  isolate themselves from taking on a comparable commitment is deeply counterproductive  and only risks prompting more of the worlds major refugee-hosting states, most recently  kenya  (kibicho  2016),  to  pursue  self-interested  and  restrictive  policies.
moreover,  the  success of arrangements such as the eu-turkey deal ultimately depends on the continued  willingness of these countries to continue to host most of the worlds refugees without any  substantial form of burden-sharing.


in that sense, the current refugee protection crisis represents a classical collective action  problem.
there can be little doubt that not only the worlds refugees but also states would  greatly benefit from a more open and coordinated response.


yet, no states will be willing  to unilaterally expand access to asylum if this would entail unrealistic financial or political  expectations, if there is no international solidarity, or if other states do not follow suit.
c.


the ineffectiveness challenge  the third, and potentially most powerful, challenge to the deterrence paradigm relates to  the continued effectiveness of the current policies.
as is well documented, refugees remain  resourceful despite the plight they are forced to endure, and may exhibit extraordinary  resilience in their efforts to find safety and protection.


migration control measures at the  european unions external borders did not prevent the sharp increase in numbers of asylum  seekers  in  european  countries  in  2015  and  preceding  years.
46  deterrence  measures  are  moreover challenged by the growing amount of resources available to human smugglers  and the constant innovation and adaption that this migration industry exhibits.


while specific deterrence measures may be successful in stemming a particular migration  path in the short term, smuggling techniques and displacement of migration flows towards  alternative routes often significantly, if not completely, undermine the effect over time.
the  recently concluded eu-turkey deal may well be one such example.


politically hailed as  a success in terms of lowering the numbers of asylum seekers along the so-called balkan  route, the number of refugees and migrants using the central mediterranean route via egypt  or libya has dramatically increased during the same period.
available data suggests that  those arriving via the central mediterranean route are mainly different nationalities than  those previously pursuing the balkan route, yet it sends a signal that alternative routes are  available.


for those currently blocked onward passage from turkey, it may thus be a matter  of time before we see a similar displacement effect, as long as the agreement does not  provide the promised alternative to putting their lives at risk (european council 2016).
46   the eu thus saw a 470% increase in arriving asylum-seekers by sea from 2014 to 2015, up from a 360%  increase the year before (fargues and di bartolomeo 2015; iom 2016).


43  the end of the deterrence paradigm?
the  humanitarian  consequence  of  these  dynamics  are  further  high    the  central  mediterranean represents a far riskier passage expressed through mounting death tolls.


47  current efforts to combat migrant smuggling is only likely to push smugglers to use longer  or more dangerous routes, or to depart during periods when weather conditions are less  favorable in order to avoid controls (gammeltoft-hansen and nyberg sorensen, eds.
2013;  brian and laczko, eds.


2014).
policies to impound maritime vessels may push smugglers  to further overcrowd boats or use inflatable or unseaworthy vessels, with poor engines and  navigation systems, equally increasing the risk to migrants lives.


similarly, recent reports  suggest that current military operations not only result in more risk-adverse behavior by  smugglers, but also entail a significant risk of collateral damage involving migrants and  refugees.
48 a final indication of the growing ineffectiveness of deterrence policies is that direct and  indirect costs related to deterrence are mounting.


in the asia pacific, australias detention  of asylum seekers both onshore and offshore cost 2.
17 billion dollars in 2014-15 alone  (refugee council of australia 2015).


third states have further become much more adept  at negotiating agreements on migration control and readmission.
in the european context,  libya negotiated a payment of 5 billion euros by italy in compensation for colonial damages  when negotiating the 2007 deal with italy to stop and readmit boat migrants crossing the  mediterranean.


49 in connection with the recent eu-turkey agreement, the european union  promised not only to provide 3 billion euros for refugee assistance, but also controversial  political concessions in regard to accession negotiations and visa liberalization.
similarly,  the response of various eu member states in reintroducing border controls in the schengen  area are likely to incur significant financial risk in relation to commuting workers, tourism,  and trade in goods and services.


a recent study projects that should schengen be entirely  abandoned,  the  european  union  would  experience  adrop  in  gdp  of  between  100  and  230  billion  euros  over  10  years  (european  parliament  directorate-general  for  internal  policies 2016).
policies to limit access to family reunification may similarly risk negatively  impacting the ability to attract labor migration in needed sectors, or even deter nationals  from returning to the domestic labor market after a period abroad.


a significant number  of danes have thus relocated to countries such as sweden due to restrictions in obtaining  family reunification in denmark.
in addition, there may be non-pecuniary costs associated  with  the  deterrence  paradigm.


loss  of  international  reputation,  political  capital,  and  diplomatic influence are all possible side effects of an approach that prioritizes deterrence  over humanitarianism.
of course, such things are inherently difficult to measure, making  any assessment highly speculative.


in sum, it is at least questionable whether european deterrence policies continue to remain  effective in light of the current situation and increasing pressure currently experienced.
as a counterfactual, australian deterrence policies have so far proved ruthlessly effective  47   in 2015, 1,015,078 people arrived in europe by sea and 3,770 died en route.


by july 2016, 237,173 had  arrived, while 2,896 had perished.
48   an internal eu planning document explicitly warned that, non-compliant boarding operations against  smugglers in the presence of migrants has a high risk of collateral damage including the loss of life (rettman  2015).


49   trattato di amicizia, partenariato e cooperazione tra il governo della repubblica italiana e la grande  giamahiria araba libica popolare socialista, august 30, 2008, ratified by italy in law on february 6, 2009,  according to gazzetta ufficiale repubblica italiana, february 18, 2009.
44  journal on migration and human securityin  stopping  the  boats.


through  the  use  of  a  combination  of  pushbacks  and  offshore  processing, the number of asylum seekers reaching australia dropped from 20,587 in 2013  to zero in 2015.
however, the australian government appears to have no exit plan for  refugees waiting for a durable solution in other pacific states, and its success may hence  be short lived as capacity in cooperating states is limited.


moreover, it remains difficult  to imagine the australian model being brought to scale in the current european context  or in situations of mass influx.
and even if deterrence measures may shift the burden of  protection to less developed states, there is no evidence that it dissuades asylum claims or  reduces the need for international protection globally.


of course, several of these three sets of challenges are hardly new, and one may object  that so far such anomalies have been handled entirely through incremental or innovative  adjustments  to  deterrence  policies.
yet,  as  various  challenges  accumulate,  patchwork  solutions gradually become harder to sustain.


taken together, the above challenges suggest  that the deterrence paradigm is not sustainable in the long term, or even perhaps in the  medium term.
and the detrimental results of deterrence are becoming increasingly clear as  access to refugee protection is systematically blocked, as refugees are forced to risk their  lives in order to reach safety, as a transnational criminal industry of human smuggling  flourishes, and as the protection capacity of developing states is pushed to the brink.


while  developed states may continue to return to the well of deterrence policies in the near future,  the current situation in europe demonstrates a need for more fundamental rethinking.
iv.


conclusions and recommendations: three tenets of a  more sustainable regime as this article has sought to demonstrate, the present refugee crisis represents not a crisis  of numbers, but of policy.
while the global number of refugees is currently at a historic  high, the worlds 21.


3 million refugees still constitute less than 0.
3 percent of the worlds  population.


and though financial contributions fall substantially short of estimated needs,  unhcrs record budget for 2016 is substantially lower than the amount us consumers  spend each year on halloween decorations, costumes and candy.
50 in other words, there is  little to suggest that the current crisis in terms of refugee numbers and global protection  capacity is an insurmountable challenge.


yet, while the evidence that the current paradigm is failing is mounting, we have still to  reach agreement on a politically acceptable alternative.
in ensuing years, various policy  visions will compete to become accepted as the replacement paradigm.


in situations such  as this, in which one era is closing and another beginning, it is typically difficult for both  practitioners and scholars to maintain a comprehensive understanding of what is going  on, including the extent to which their own work constructively feeds into the process of  paradigm change (kuhn and hacking 2012).
in terms of what will end up prevailing, this is still an open question.


but to be successful,  any new policy paradigm must as a minimum successfully address the core problems left  unaddressed by the existing paradigm.
taking heed of the above challenges, those in search  50   the unhcr budget for 2016, as approved by the executive committee, was 6.


5 billion dollars  (unhcr 2016b) .
45  the end of the deterrence paradigm?


of a new policy paradigm for global refugee protection may thus want to start by addressing  the following three issues.
a.


continued respect for international refugee law  if we accept that the deterrence paradigm is a particular instantiation of the current refugee  regime, we also need to carefully distinguish between the existing political framing of the  current regime and its underlying normative structures.
this makes the recent arguments  by policymakers, calling for a revision or complete abandonment of the 1951 refugee  convention, difficult to sustain.


not only was the 1951 refugee convention designed very  much with the kind of large-scale refugee situation we are facing today in mind, one would  be hard pressed to find another human rights instrument that is so inherently, some might  argue overly, sensitive to states political concerns.
refugee law leaves states largely free  in terms of how to organize their domestic asylum procedures, explicitly excludes those  underserving of protection, and allows states to apply exceptions if they have well-founded  security and public order concerns.


furthermore, the drafters were attentive to the issue of  not overburdening states facing mass influx, and to this end the convention applies a novel  approach where rights are granted incrementally instead of all at once, and in many cases  only guaranteed relative to how the particular state grants rights to its own citizens.
over  the last half century the 1951 refugee convention has thus proven itself a flexible and  robust instrument, laying down a rights framework, which ought to remain at the core of  any political reform process.


b.
meaningful responsibility- and burden-sharing  within the parameters of the current legal regime however, it is possible to imagine a range  of far-reaching reforms to both the institutional and political framework for organizing  international  refugee  protection.


a  key  element  in  this  process  must  be  to  address  the  current misdistribution of both refugee responsibility and protection capacity.
a stronger  commitment to international solidarity should build both on the sharing of responsibility  in regard to refugees, e.


g.
, through resettlement, humanitarian visas, or global and regional  distribution mechanisms, or on the sharing of resources, such as humanitarian assistance,  expert staff, know-how, and money.


a number of scholars and refugee advocates have called for a general distribution model,  with  quotas  based  on  each  countrys  population  size,  gdp,  unemployment  rates,  etc.
while such a model undoubtedly achieves a form of fairness among states, we believe  it is unlikely to work even in the more limited european context.


the first objection is  political.
the existing ad hoc redistribution scheme within the european union has hardly  been a success, and few member states would willingly sign on to what they perceive to  be a blank check in such a politically sensitive area.


but more importantly, such a model  further  fails  to  take  account  of  refugees  individual  wishes,  capabilities,  networks,  and  personal attachments.
based on existing data, any such model will in all likelihood lead to  widespread secondary movement.


46  journal on migration and human securityin  contrast,  a  common  but  differentiated  approach  implies  that  while  all  states  must  contribute in a proportionate and meaningful manner, not all states need provide the same  kind of commitment (hathaway 2016, 93-99).
countries in the region of origin, or along the  most common arrival routes to the european union, cannot be expected to continue to host  the vast majority of refugees.


the only way to ensure the continued willingness of these  states to open their borders is to institutionalize a significant and systematic commitment  to responsibility-sharing through, for example, resettlement quotas and humanitarian visa  programs.
moreover, major refugee hosting countries must be properly compensated, and  not just with money for humanitarian aid, but through a systematic investment in their  national economies, in order to boost trade opportunities and create more jobs to benefit  both the refugees and local populations alike.


51  c.
a broader notion of refugee protection  for  far  too  long  refugee  protection  in  the  major  countries  of  first  asylum  has  focused  almost entirely on providing basic physical safety and humanitarian assistance without a  meaningful commitment to refugee protection, much less durable solutions.


yet, the data  from the syrian crisis clearly shows us that other rights are equally important if refugees  are to establish a life and not feel compelled to flee onwards.
these other rights relate to  refugees ability to establish a livelihood, to access basic infrastructures such as health  care and the justice system, and to ensure a future for their children through education.


it  is high time we move beyond the current containment approach and start thinking more  thoroughly about refugee protection: how can we create more and faster job and self- reliance opportunities?
how can we ensure access to education in a way that refugees can  benefit from whether or not they have to stay in the host country or eventually return home?


and how do you ensure that refugees are not marginalized in the societies and justice  systems of the host countries?
a  second  element  paving  the  way  for  more  effective  policymaking  vis-a-vis  asylum  seekers is for states, individually and collectively, to enhance their preparedness to receive  refugees.


any serious change to the current refugee regime must move beyond exploitation  of the contours of international refugee law, and the reactive approach of individual states  awaiting the arrival of refugees on their territories.
planning for and cooperation in regard  to  refugee  arrivals  is  essential.


the  current  regimes  apparatus  of  cooperation-based  migration control paradoxically shows that origin, transit, and asylum states are engaging  as  never  before.
harnessing  new  forms  of  more  protection-oriented  cooperation,  states  may wish to draw on both historical examples, such as the comprehensive plan of action  for indochinese refugees (betts 2006), and more current initiatives, for example, the multi- stakeholder process in regard to refugee protection in the northern triangle of central  america organized by unhcr (unhcr 2016a).


51   for a proposal to this end, see betts and collier (2015, 84).
47  the end of the deterrence paradigm?


