borders and duties to the  displaced: ethical perspectives on  the refugee protection system  david hollenbach, s.
j.


georgetown university  executive summary this essay proposes some ethical perspectives that can help in the task of  reassessing the structure of the global refugee protection system in light of  the extraordinarily high levels of refugee movement and forced migration  occurring today.
it addresses two chief areas.


first, it considers whether  ethical duties reach beyond the borders that separate nation-states and the  implications of such duties for the treatment of refugees and other displaced  persons.
drawing on classical ethical perspectives found in secular moral  thought and in several religious traditions, the essay argues that national  borders have moral weight, but that grave violations of the rights of displaced  persons can create responsibilities that are more stringent than duties to  co-citizens of ones own country.


second, the essay examines whether the  duties to co-citizens or to displaced persons should take priority in various  contexts.
negative duties that have particular urgency in the effort to shape  a more adequate response to forced migrants are proposed, drawing upon  classic criteria in the ethics and law of war.


these include the avoidance  of aggression, war crimes, crimes against humanity, and other violations  of justice that often lead to mass displacement.
positive duties to come to  the aid of the displaced are also developed in light of several standards:  the needs of the displaced, the proximity and capability of the responder,  whether the response is a last resort, and if the response can be carried  out without disproportionate burden on the responder.


these negative and  positive duties are then drawn upon to argue for a significantly more active  response to the needs of forced migrants by developed nations in the global  north, by regional and global intergovernmental organizations, by secular  and  faith-based  humanitarian  nongovernmental  organizations  (ngos),  and by citizens at large.
i.


introduction the international refugee protection system is severely challenged today.
in recent decades  the forced movement of refugees and internally displaced persons has been rising markedly,  reaching an extraordinarily high level today by historical standards.


it is well known that  there are more displaced people today than at any time since world war ii.
despite the    2016 by the center for migration studies of new york.


all rights reserved.
jmhs volume 4 number 3 (2016): 148-165efforts and achievements of many governments and many humanitarian organizations, the  protection of displaced persons from the harms they routinely suffer remains a distant goal.


many analysts believe that the conditions faced by forced migrants today have brought  the  refugee  regime  to  a  turning  point.
un  secretary-general  ban  ki-moon  has  called  the situation a monumental crisis that will require a response based on monumental  solidarity (ki-moon 2016).


the regime that has been in place since the adoption of the  1951 convention relating to the status of refugees needs to be reexamined.
the challenge  to  develop  more  adequate  ways  of  protecting  the  humanity  of  those  threatened  by  displacement is in part a moral one.


this essay will propose several ethical perspectives that  may be of help in this reassessment.
the moral challenges, of course, are deeply embedded  in the political, military, economic, environmental, and other conditions that drive people  from  home.


examining  the  ethical  issues,  therefore,  requires  paying  close  attention  to  these social conditions.
but this essay will highlight several distinctly ethical issues that  arise in the reform of the refugee regime.


the goal is to draw upon some existing ethical  wisdom to shed light on our moral responsibilities to those who are suffering because of the  displacement brought about by war and disaster today.
the first part of the essay will address the significance of the borders separating national  communities and the sovereignty of states for our moral responsibilities toward displaced  people.


are there duties that reach beyond the borders of diverse peoples and sovereign  states?
if so, how do these duties relate to the responsibilities people have to citizens of  their own country?


it will be argued that there are duties both to fellow citizens and to those  in great need, especially to those who have no other form of protection than that provided  by humanitarian assistance, asylum, or both.
the second part will suggest that since we  have duties both to fellow citizens and to those from other countries who are facing the  crisis of forced displacement, we need to clarify priorities among these types of duty in  various circumstances.


such priorities will be developed in light of several negative duties  not to treat people in ways that cause displacement and several positive duties to take action  when forced migration is already occurring.
it will be suggested that acting in accord with  these priorities will help create a more adequate refugee protection system, and that a better  system of protection will in turn facilitate fulfillment of the duties proposed.


ii.
nation states and duties beyond borders in the face of the growth in the number of refugees and other forced migrants and the degree  of their suffering in recent years, some analysts have been calling for a radical rethinking of  the relevance of national borders for the ethical responsibilities toward displaced persons.


secular political philosophers such as joseph carens and refugee scholars like philip marfleet  argued some years ago that the time may have come to consider making borders fully open  to all who are fleeing from persecution, conflict, or disaster (carens 1987; marfleet 2006,  288-90).
in  a  similar  spirit,  philosopher  martha  nussbaum  argued  that  a  cosmopolitan  community of all human beings has primacy over narrower communities defined in terms  of nationality, ethnicity, or religion.


indeed she called nationality a morally irrelevant  characteristic of personhood, a position that amounted to an ethical call for open borders  (nussbaum 2002, 5).
149  borders and duties to the displacedsuch  a  universalist  cosmopolitan  ethic  echoes  the  first  of  the  principles  that  guide  the  actions of the international committee of the red cross (icrc) and that is usually taken  as foundation of the humanitarian movement, namely the principle of humanity (icrc  1986).


the chief author of the icrcs principles, jean pictet, noted that in this principle  the term humanity refers to the whole of humankind and all its members (pictet 1979).
concern for humanity, therefore, is concern for all members of the human race and the  conditions  that  all  are  facing.


to  act  in  accord  with  humanity  is  to  act  with  inclusive  concern toward all men and women.
the principle of humanity thus leads to another of  the icrcs standards: impartiality.


to act with humanity is to respond impartially to all  members of the human family on the basis of their need, not because of some characteristic  that differentiates them from others, such as their citizenship, nationality, race, religion,  class, or political opinion.
the universality of the icrcs principle of humanity is also a characteristic of the normative  basis of the modern human rights movement.


human rights are rooted in the universal  and equal dignity of all human beings.
the preamble of the 1948 universal declaration  of human rights directly links recognition of the inherent dignity of all persons with  protection of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family.


1 the  commitment of the human rights movement to the dignity of all persons, not just those  belonging to particular nations, religions, or ethnicities, is evident from the fact that the  united nations titled its 1948 statement of human rights a universal declaration.
drawing on the normative standards of both the humanitarian and human rights movements,  we can affirm that all persons deserve equal protection from grave threats to their worth  as persons.


this is evident in the way terms such as all, everyone, and no one are  used throughout the universal declaration of human rights.
the declaration states that  all persons possess human rights without distinctions based on race, color, sex, language,  religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin.


2 this relativizes all in-group/ out-group  boundaries.
it  challenges  understandings  of  religious,  national,  or  cultural  identity that would limit respect only to those people belonging to a particular community.


the human rights ethos thus seeks to tear down the walls dividing people into those who  count and those who do not count, at least when the most basic requirements of humanity  are at stake.
no white rule over non-white; no aryan over jew; no european colonist over  non-european colonized; no male superiority to female.


though religious convictions are  deeply important to those who hold them, such convictions must never be used to deny  the humanity or human rights of others in the name of god.
ethnic or national identities  are never legitimate grounds for excluding people from the most basic requirements of  their human dignity.


respect for human dignity also requires fulfilling the social/economic  rights of all people to adequate food, work, education, and health care, and for the solidarity  across economic differences required to fulfill these rights.
3 this cosmopolitan vision is rooted in a commitment to human dignity that can be supported  by secular philosophical argument.


pictet affirmed that the icrcs principle of humanity   1   universal declaration of human rights (10 dec.
1948), u.


n.
g.


a.
res.


217 a (iii) (1948).
2   id.


, art.
2.


3   international covenant on economic, social and cultural rights (new york, 16 dec.
1966) 993 u.


n.
t.


s.
3, entered into force 3 jan.


1976.
150  journal on migration and human securityrequires that everyone shall be treated as a human being and not as an object, as an end in  himself and not as a mere means to an end (pictet 1979, 17).


this language echoes a major  philosophical understanding of human worth or human dignity, namely that of immanuel  kant.
the core principle of kants moral philosophy is that persons are always to be treated  as ends in themselves, and never simply as means (kant 1993, 36).


all persons possess  this dignity.
thus kant was led to adopt a cosmopolitan morality that sees some important  political responsibilities reaching across national borders.


this cosmopolitan orientation can also be supported on religious grounds.
both judaism  and christianity hold that all persons are brothers and sisters in a single human family no  matter what their nationality or ethnicity.


every person has been created in the image and  likeness of god (genesis 1:27).
this common creation gives every person a shared dignity  and worth that reaches across all boundaries that are humanly constructed, such as the  borders between nation-states.


these borders are in no way absolute and must be seen as  subordinate to the respect due to the shared dignity of every person as an image of god.
pope  francis drew on this biblical vision during his recent visit to the greek island of lesbos,  where he assured syrian refugees seeking entrance into europe that god created mankind  to be one family and called europe to to build bridges rather than putting up walls  (francis 2016a, 2016b).


such sensitivity to the needs of migrants and refugees is present not  only in christianity but also in judaism and islam.
each of great monotheistic traditions of  judaism, christianity, and islam traces its origins back to the patriarch abraham, who was  himself a migrant from the home of his kinsfolk to the land of canaan.


the identity of jews  is also importantly shaped by the story of the exodus  a migration from slavery in egypt  to freedom in the land of gods promise.
the new testament portrays jesus as the leader  of a new israel, who just after his birth had to flee persecution as a refugee to egypt along  with mary and joseph.


muslims measure time from the founding event of muhammads  hijra, or migration, from mecca to medina.
the founding of each of these major faiths has  migration across borders as one of its key elements, which is one of the reasons each of these  faith communities sees its religious and ethical commitments as reaching across borders.


the great asian religions also insist that ethical duties do not stop at national or religious  boundaries, particularly when refugees and migrants are in danger (for fuller development,  see hollenbach 2014).
a similar sense of universal responsibility can be found in african  traditions,  where  concepts  such  as  bumuntu  (humanness),  umoja  (unity),  and  ujamaa  (solidarity) point to the interconnectedness of all persons (nkulu-nsengha 2011, 38-40).


there is little doubt, of course, that religious communities can fall into in-group versus out- group conflicts that are among the causes of forced migration.
nevertheless, most religious  traditions possess a strong normative conviction that ethical responsibility reaches across  religious and national boundaries and that the fullest expression of moral virtue is assisting  people in distress, including strangers, migrants, and refugees.


pope john xxiii appealed to this normative universalism in 1963 when he drew on both  christian religious warrants and secular philosophical arguments to affirm that national  boundaries do not limit the reach of moral duty.
indeed the pope explicitly argued that  citizenship  itself  is  not  limited  by  national  boundaries  but  has  an  authentically  global  meaning.


in his words, the fact that one is a citizen of a particular state does not detract in  any way from his membership in the human family as a whole, nor from his citizenship in  the world community (john xxiii 1963, no.
25).


this affirmation of the reality of global   151  borders and duties to the displacedcommunity relativizes the moral significance of national borders and state sovereignty.
it  means that the duty to protect human rights reaches across borders.


such trans-border duties  have particular relevance to the plight of refugees, who by definition lack the protection that  would normally be provided by their home state.
since refugees have lost the protection of  their home state, they will effectively end up with no rights at all unless the duty to protect  rights is genuinely transnational.


the duty to protect the displaced must therefore reach  across borders if they are to receive any protection at all.
as pope john xxiii stressed,  refugees cannot lose these rights simply because they are deprived of citizenship of their  own states (john xxiii 1963, no.


105).
in international politics, however, states do matter.


even in the midst of todays growing  global  interdependence,  national  communities  continue  to  play  very  important  roles  in  relation to the rights and needs of displaced people.
from a normative point of view, an  authentically cosmopolitan ethos calls for recognition that while all persons share a common  humanity, showing concrete respect for all will require recognizing that every person also  has  distinctive  characteristics,  including  diverse  bonds  of  kinship,  culture,  and  shared  citizenship.


thus respecting people as they are calls for respect both for their common  humanity and also for the ways they differ from each other (appiah 2006, xiv-xviii).
one  of the key differences between people is their nationality and citizenship.


recognition of  this fact has recently led nussbaum to reverse her earlier position that national borders  are morally irrelevant.
she now draws on grotius and kant to argue that people exercise  their freedom and express their dignity by shaping the institutions of their own nation-state  (nussbaum 2006, 255-62).


seyla benhabib has developed a similar argument (benhabib  2004).
for  these  reasons,  protecting  human  dignity  will  require  respect  for  the  self- determination of accountable states.


at the same time, both nussbaum and benhabib also  insist that sovereignty must be understood in a way that fully supports the fundamental  human rights of all, including migrants and refugees.
they seek to protect these rights by  calling for porous borders rather than entirely open borders.


an adequate assessment of  responsibilities toward refugees and other displaced persons will thus require taking into  account the importance of states for the protection of dignity and rights.
it will also have to  assess the impact of forced migration both on the human dignity of those who have been  displaced and also on the communities who receive them.


there are religious warrants for the duty to respect communal differences just as there  are  for  the  duty  to  respect  common  humanity.
in  judaism,  gods  covenant  with  israel  gives the jewish people a distinctive religious and national identity that must be respected.


this stress on religious distinctiveness gives jews a particularly strong sensitivity to the  right of diverse peoples to be different from each other.
of course, this sensitivity to the  importance of difference does not eliminate israels awareness of the duty to respect the  common humanity of all persons affirmed in the creation story and in gods covenant with  noah, which extends beyond israel to all of creation (genesis 9:1-17).


indeed precisely  because of the special covenant that led god to set israel free from bondage as strangers  in egypt, the hebrew bible repeatedly stresses that the jewish people have strong duties  to the strangers they encounter in the land of israel itself: you shall not oppress an alien;  you well know how it feels to be an alien, since you were once aliens yourselves in the land  of egypt (exodus 23:9; see leviticus 19:33-34 and many other places).
thus judaism  combines universalism and particularism in a way that recognizes both the right to national   152  journal on migration and human securityself-determination and an onerous duty to migrants and refugees that reaches across the  borders of israel and the jewish people (sacks 2003, ch.


3).
catholic social ethics also seeks to combine cosmopolitan universalism with respect for the  distinctive identities of peoples.


st.
augustine and st.


thomas aquinas affirm a christian  duty to love all humans as our neighbors.
at the same time they recognize that those with  whom we have special relationships, such as the members of our family or our political  community, deserve special treatment as an expression of our love for them.


thus a key  task in christian ethical reflection is to determine the order of priorities that should exist  among these diverse loves (an ordo amoris).
in some circumstances love for those nearer  to us should take priority over concern for those at greater distances.


on the other hand,  when those farther away have greater needs, they can have priority.
similarly, catholic  social thought also appeals to what has come to be called the principle of subsidiarity  to determine whether the more local or more global should take priority.


this principle  affirms that there are special duties within smaller and more proximate communities.
in  tandem with the principle of solidarity, subsidiarity also insists that when there is serious  need at a greater distance or when local communities cannot or will not respond to this  need, larger regional communities or the international community as a whole can have a  duty to provide help (subsidium) to those in need (pius xi 1939, nos.


79-80).
though  the  subsidiarity  principle  was  developed  within  catholic  social  thought,  it  has  become a standard point of reference in the european union (the union) in discussions  of the relation between the responsibilities of the larger structures of the union and the  responsibilities of each of the european states.


subsidiarity requires that the union itself  should act only when member states cannot achieve required goals or when the union  itself is better able to achieve what is needed.
4 in other words, the larger transnational  community of the union does not replace the communal bonds that exist in the member  states but supplements the action of the states when they are unable to take needed action  or when the union itself can act more effectively.


in an analogous way, subsidiarity implies  that the  primary responsibility toward internally displaced persons  falls on  the country  of which they are citizens.
their own country has the primary duty to protect them.


but  if their country of citizenship fails to protect them or acts in a way that compels them  to flee, the duty of protection moves to neighboring countries and to larger regional and  international actors.
thus national borders carry considerable moral weight in determining ethical responsibilities  toward displaced persons, but there are also obligations to the displaced that reach across  borders.


from both a secular philosophical standpoint and in most religious perspectives,  there are duties both to ones fellow citizens and to forced migrants who need of protection  through asylum or through some other form of emergency assistance.
neither of these  types of duty is absolute.


duties to fellow citizens do not always trump duties to forced  migrants, nor do duties to forced migrants always override duties to co-citizens.
the key  question,  therefore,  becomes  what  relative  weight  should  be  assigned  to  each  of  these  duties in diverse circumstances.


4   treaty on european union (maastricht, 7 feb.
1992), european union consolidated treaties, entered into  force 1 nov.


1993, title i, art.
5(3).


153  borders and duties to the displacediii.
the need for priorities the displacement crises of today thus call for careful reflection on the relative weights of  the obligations and rights that arise from our common humanity on the one hand and from  our distinctive identities and citizenship in specific states on the other hand.


let me suggest  several priorities among these types of obligations, focusing first on action required by  negative duties not to act in ways that cause displacement and the kinds of mass movements  of refugees we are witnessing today, and then on several positive duties to take action to  alleviate the plight of the displaced and to improve the protection system that is currently  in place.
these two types of duties can be equally stringent (shue 1980, 51-60).


a.
negative duties  most of the forced migration in the world today is caused by conflict and war.


half of  todays refugees have been driven from homes by the conflicts in syria, afghanistan, and  somalia, and most of the internally displaced have been forced to flee by conflict within  their countries (guhenno 2016).
key negative duties relevant to displacement caused by  conflict can be highlighted by drawing on the moral tradition known as the just war ethic.


this tradition distinguishes morally legitimate from illegitimate use of force, so it should  probably be called the just/unjust war tradition.
it has roots in christian thought, especially  catholicism, but it has analogies in other religious traditions and overlaps in important  ways with the tradition of the international law of armed conflict (walters 1971; walzer  1977; hehir 1980; hashmi 2002).


in its modern form the just/unjust war tradition draws a sharp line between force used in the  defense of human rights and force that violates rights.
the jus ad bellum norm of just cause  requires that force be strictly limited to defending the rights of innocent persons to life,  freedom, and security, and the rights of nation-states to self-determination and territorial  integrity.


conversely, there is a negative duty not to use force aggressively against other  peoples to deny them their political freedom, to exploit them economically, or because they  are culturally different.
violation of these negative duties is both immoral and criminal.


such a violation is just what happened in perhaps the worst humanitarian crisis of recent  times: the rwanda genocide of 1994, where force was massively used to deny the basic  rights of the tutsi people.
it was also appallingly violated in the slaughter at srebrenica,  where thousands of bosnian muslims were killed because of their identity as part of an  ethnic  cleansing.


the  displacements  that  resulted  from  each  of  these  conflicts  were  massive.
this suggests that a central priority in efforts to prevent massive forced migration  should be much stronger efforts to prevent and halt the unjust resort to the use of force.


just war norms also forbid direct, intentional attacks on civilians, as well as collateral harm  to civilians that is disproportionate to the good being sought.
international law sets forth  similar prohibitions in the geneva conventions, which insist that civilians be distinguished  from soldiers and be protected both from direct attack and from disproportionate collateral  harm.


5  violations  of  these  standards  are  war  crimes  and  can  become  crimes  against   5   protocol additional to the geneva conventions of 12 august 1949, and relating to the protection of victims  of international armed conflicts (protocol i), (geneva, 8 june 1977) 1125 u.
n.


t.
s.


3, art.
48.


154  journal on migration and human securityhumanity if widespread and systematic (robertson, 2006, 430-39).
regrettably, several  of the worst recent cases of forced migration have been due to violations of these moral and  legal prohibitions of attacks on civilians.


for example, tactics used in the civil war that began in south sudan in december 2013 have  regularly violated the rights of civilians to security.
human rights watch (hrw) and a un  panel of experts concluded that both the government of south sudan and the opposition  forces had committed extraordinary acts of cruelty that amount to war crimes and in some  cases potential crimes against humanity (hrw 2014; panel of experts 2015).


because  of this mayhem, by july 2015, over 1.
6 million south sudanese had become internally  displaced and over 750,000 had become refugees.


the strategies and tactics used by both  sides  in  south  sudan  have  themselves  turned  south  sudan  into  a  grave  humanitarian  emergency marked by massive displacement.
the syrian crisis reinforces the conclusion that armed conflict can lead to mass displacement  when  the  adversaries  violate  their  duty  not  to  attack  basic  rights  of  civilians.


the  un  independent commission of inquiry on syria concluded that the war crimes, crimes against  humanity, and human rights violations were so severe that the syrian reality should shock  the conscience of humanity (unhrc 2014, no.
138).


these violations have led to the  single largest forced migration in recent history.
the flight of refugees has threatened the  stability of neighboring countries, including turkey, which today hosts the largest number  of refugees of any country in the world; lebanon, where more than one in every six persons  within the countrys borders is a refugee from syria; and jordan.


the international criminal court (icc) was established in 1998 to hold people accountable  for violations of standards of international law like those that occurred in rwanda and  bosnia and that are continuing in south sudan and syria.
the rome statute that created the  icc gave it jurisdiction over genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes, and the crime  of aggression.


the rome statute arose from the recognition that duties of the international  community  based  on  our  common  humanity  can  take  priority  over  the  sovereignty  of  independent nation-states when human rights violations rise to the level of atrocity.
the  icc  has  so  far  not  been  able  to  bring  to  trial  some  of  those  it  has  charged  with  such  atrocities due to its inability to secure cooperation on various fundamental matters.


for  example, while president omar al bashir of sudan faces charges of genocide and crimes  against humanity for his actions in the darfur region of sudan, he has thus far eluded  arrest due to the reluctance of certain icc member states to detain him.
in another case,  charges against president uhuru kenyatta of kenya had to be dropped because the icc  prosecutor could not get witnesses to testify, likely because of threats to their safety and  bribes.


nevertheless, the icc has had success in a number of other cases and it has launched  a  process  that  promises  to  strengthen  the  accountability faced  by  those  responsible  for  the atrocities that contribute to some of the worst refugee and migration crises occurring  today.
duties not to violate basic rights are surely more likely to be enforced today than  in the past, and those who do violate them are less likely to get away with it than used to  be the case.


people will continue to be forced to flee from their homes as long as they face  the danger of being caught up in conflict marked by unjust and indiscriminate violence.
preventing displacement thus requires notably more effective ways to hold the military and  political leaders who organize such violence accountable for what they do.


enforcement   155  borders and duties to the displacedof the law of war and of the standards of international humanitarian law should thus be a  priority in efforts to enhance the effectiveness of the refugee protection system.
b.


positive duties  regrettably, we have learned from history and from insight into human moral weakness  that threats to human rights will continue to occur.
this raises the question of what positive  obligations we have to come to the assistance of the displaced when crises in fact occur.


to address this issue we can draw on a mode of moral analysis originally developed in the  1970s in the context of debate about who had duties to help eliminate the apartheid regime  that separated south african people by race and ethnicity.
in that debate, some maintained  that only those who had created the apartheid system had a duty to work to overcome it.


but a very different ethical approach was proposed by several scholars at yale university  who argued that under certain circumstances persons, communities, institutions, and states  can have positive duties to help remedy harms they did not themselves cause.
they called  their approach the kew gardens principle, for it arose from their reflection on a tragic case  that occurred in the kew gardens section of new york city in 1964 (simon, powers, and  gunnemann 1972).


according to press reports, a young woman named kitty genovese  was viciously assaulted, stabbed, and died a slow death while 38 nearby people watched  and did nothing, failing even to call the police.
it has since been learned that the initial  reports of what happened were not fully accurate (lemann 2014).


but the public outrage  stimulated by the press reports points to the fact that most people have a conviction that  there can be positive moral duties to aid others in emergency situations.
it is not enough to  avoid causing harm.


in some situations omission can become as morally objectionable as  commission.
drawing on this conviction, the kew gardens principle argues that an agent has a positive  responsibility to help when four conditions are present: (1) there is a critical need; (2) the  agent has proximity to the need; (3) the agent has the capability to assist; (4) the agent is  likely the last resort from whom help can be expected (simon, powers, and gunnemann  1972, 23-25).


subsequent reflection has added a fifth condition: (5) the action can be taken  without disproportionate harm to the one providing assistance.
these criteria, of course,  cannot be applied mechanically.


but they can help us think about the scope of positive  responsibilities in the face of the crisis-level suffering that is displacing so many people  today.
for example, there can be little doubt that large numbers of people are in grave need of  protection in syria and south sudan today and that this need is driving many from their  homes.


those inside the borders of these crisis-torn countries are vulnerable to harms that  could lead to their deaths or to violations of other basic rights, and they are in flight because  of this vulnerability.
the duty to respond to such need falls first upon those whose proximity  to the crisis makes them more likely to have knowledge of the need and better understanding  of how to respond to it.


this means, of course, that the government of the nation where  the crisis occurs and local communities within that nation bear the prime responsibility.
in south sudan and syria, therefore, both the governments and the opposition forces in  each country have the negative duty to stop the atrocities that are causing crisis and the   156  journal on migration and human securitypositive duty to help lift the burdens of suffering.


duty to take positive action, however,  does not end at the national borders of the countries where crisis is present.
when people  become aware of crisis in a neighboring country or even in a country at a great distance,  this awareness leads to what might be called intellectual or psychological proximity.


it puts  them in moral proximity to those who are suffering.
there has been helpful though imperfect response to the duties arising from proximity by  the countries neighboring south sudan.


the regional organization of sudans neighboring  countries  djibouti, ethiopia, kenya, somalia, sudan, uganda, and eritrea  is called  the intergovernmental authority on development (igad).
igad has played a diplomatic  role in seeking to mediate the conflict within south sudan that began in 2013, as they  did in helping secure the comprehensive peace agreement that ended the earlier conflict  between northern and southern sudan that ultimately led to the independence of south  sudan in 2011.


regrettably, economic and political self-interest has sometimes distorted  the mediation efforts of several countries that are part of igad, particularly uganda and  ethiopia.
this has in turn led several countries from outside the region to become involved  in an effort known as igad plus, which includes the african union (au), united nations,  china, united states, united kingdom, norway, and the european union.


a sense of moral  responsibility  arose  in  these  more  distant  countries  because  of  their  proximity  through  awareness.
these combined regional and global mediation efforts have certainly not been  perfect.


nevertheless, a fragile peace process is underway (icg 2015).
both nearby and  distant neighbors can have the knowledge that enables them to make a difference.


the  criterion  of  capability  also  sheds  light  on  positive  duties  to  respond  to  crises  that  displace large numbers of people.
in considering this issue it has become common to point  out that someone who cannot swim does not have a duty to come to the aid of a child who is  drowning if providing the aid requires swimming, while a good swimmer can have a duty  to respond.


lebanon, turkey, and jordan are today already massively overburdened with  syrian refugees.
they do not possess the economic and other resources to take in many  additional refugees.


on the other hand, the resources of the wealthy nations of northern  europe,  north america,  and  the  oil-producing  gulf  states  give  them  the  capability  to  receive  many  more  refugees  and  to  share  the  burdens  being  carried  by  syrias  already  overtaxed proximate neighbors.
the assistance being provided to the countries bordering  syria is woefully inadequate.


capability to assist gives many nations in europe, north  america, and the gulf a duty both to receive many more syrian refugees than they have  and a responsibility to provide more assistance to syrias nearby neighbors (rummery  2015).
the duty to share the burden of assistance to displaced people is proportional to  the capability of doing so.


countries with greater economic and political capacities to help  have proportionally greater responsibilities to do so.
these responsibilities may be carried  out by granting asylum and refugee status to more of the displaced, and, perhaps most  urgently, by providing economic and other forms of assistance to countries like turkey,  lebanon, and jordan who are already carrying a disproportionate burden.


the existence of duties such as these is a consequence of the fact that the responsibility to  assist displaced people reaches across national borders.
the fact that state sovereignty is  not a moral or political absolute becomes clear in face of the needs of forcibly displaced  persons.


in his work on response to the needs of internally displaced people, the sudanese   157  borders and duties to the displacedscholar and diplomat francis mading deng argued that sovereignty is such an important  value because it secures each countrys ability to protect its own people by preventing  external powers from taking harmful action within its national boundaries, for example  by invasion or colonial exploitation.
deng called this sovereignty-as-responsibility (deng  1996).


sovereignty does not mean a government is free to do whatever it will within its own  borders, such as taking actions that create large numbers of internally displaced persons  or refugees.
if a government fails to protect its own people, either because it is unable  or unwilling to do so, the duty to assist those who are threatened by this failure can pass  to the other nations.


thus the responsibility to assist and to protect the rights of persons  threatened with or experiencing displacement falls first on their own government.
but if  their government is unable or unwilling to secure their rights, the responsibility to do so  can move to other countries and their people (martin 2010, 28-31).


dengs thinking contributed in an important way to the development of the doctrine of  the responsibility to protect (r2p), initially proposed by the international commission  on intervention and state sovereignty (iciss) and subsequently affirmed at the 2005 un  general assembly world summit (unga 2005, nos.
138-39; iciss 2001).


r2p states that  the international community can have positive duties to help protect populations from  genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.
protective action  should come in the first instance from peoples own government.


only if that government  is failing to provide this protection should other countries consider action.
when violations  of human rights reach the level of atrocity and lead to the displacement such violations  often cause, action by other countries through diplomatic, humanitarian and other peaceful  means can become appropriate and even required.


the responsibility to protect has been the focus of heated controversy since it was endorsed  by heads of state at the un general assembly in 2005.
political realists oppose it because  they hold that foreign policy should be determined by the interests of ones own people,  not by a supposed moral responsibility to other countries.


others see it as a form of neo- imperialism.
still others say that the situation in libya today in the aftermath of the nato  intervention there shows r2p doesnt work, and that the current massive crisis in syria and  surrounding countries shows the r2p cannot work.


despite these critiques, it is important  to note that the responsibility to protect has in fact been invoked on a number of occasions  since 2005 and that it has led to effective protection of people from grave rights violations.
for  example,  when  conflict  flared  in  kenya  following  the  disputed  2007  elections,  nonviolent, diplomatic initiatives were taken by numerous international actors to stop the  conflict that took several thousand lives and displaced half a million people.


kofi annan  stated that he saw the crisis in kenya through the r2p prism (cohen 2008).
this led  to intense diplomatic initiatives by the united nations, the african union, and a number  of  other  governments  from  africa  and  around  the  world,  including  the  united  states  (international  coalition  for  r2p,  sec.


ii).
a  power  sharing  agreement  was  reached  and  the downward spiral into civil war and perhaps even genocide was stopped.


the kenyan  case illustrates that the responsibility to protect can be successfully carried out through  nonviolent political and diplomatic means.
the r2p doctrine has also been invoked on several occasions in the past decade to justify  the  use  of  military  force  to  protect  people  from  atrocities,  following  the  un  general   158  journal on migration and human securityassemblys affirmation that if diplomatic initiatives do not succeed, the use of armed force  can become legitimate as a last resort under chapter vii of the un charter.


for example,  in 2012 france and the economic community of west african states took military action  with un approval in the pursuit of peace in mali, and in 2013, the un security council  supported the use of force by french and african union troops to stop the atrocities that  were occurring in the central african republic and the displacement of nearly one million  refugees and other forced migrants.
6 though these cases are certainly not resolved, they  indicate that the doctrine of the responsibility to protect can lead to action that can help  prevent grave crisis from becoming much worse and can lead to some improvement in  crisis situations that force many people from their homes.


two other cases, however, libya  and syria, raise questions about whether r2p has any relevance to current efforts to respond  to the refugee crisis.
in the libya case, the united nations authorized action to protect civilians when fears  arose that libyas leader, muammar al-qaddafi, was about to commit atrocities.


qaddafi  referred to his adversaries in benghazi as cockroaches, the very epithet hutu used for  tutsi during the rwanda genocide (bbc news 2011).
as a result, the un security council,  with the notable support of the organization of the islamic conference and the league of  arab states, called for the use of all necessary measures to protect civilians.


7 nato  intervened with airpower, qaddafi was killed, and his regime was overthrown.
sadly, libya  has since fallen into political chaos, with armed conflicts among several groups, significant  violations of human rights on the basis of religion, the displacement of many, and the unsafe  flight  of  migrants  across  the  mediterranean  (amnesty  international  2015,  5-6).


these  consequences confirm for some observers the conviction that pursuing humanitarian goals  not required by national self-interest is likely to do more harm than good (kuperman 2015,  66-77).
i would argue, however, that the intervention in libya failed not because it was  excessive but because it was incomplete.


following the norms that some specialists in the  ethics of war are today calling jus post bellum, justice after conflict, nato and the united  states should have followed up their intervention with action to rebuild and to prevent the  chaos that developed (chollet and fishman 2015, 154-57).
what happened in libya was  an incomplete implementation of r2p, not a simple failure.


had the intervention followed  through with the peace building and reconstruction efforts that were clearly required, the  situation on the ground in libya would not have disintegrated in the way that it has, and  many fewer people would be in flight from the chaos of that tragic situation.
syria has also been invoked to suggest that r2p is dead.


the political complexities and moral  ambiguities of the syrian situation go very deep.
but these complexities do not discredit the  existence of a duty to protect people facing atrocities when protection is possible.


thomas  weiss  has  argued  that  the  wisdom  of  the  use  of  military  force  to  protect  people  from  atrocities is governed by three factors: legality, moral legitimacy, and feasibility (weiss  2014).
in syria it is clear that the legal prohibitions of war crimes and of other atrocities  have been massively violated.


the moral legitimacy of efforts to stop a conflict that has   6   un security council resolution 2085, u.
n.


doc.
s/res/2085 (2012) [authorizing intervention in mali];  un security council resolution 2127, u.


n.
doc.


s/res/2127 [authorizing intervention in central african  republic].
7   un security council resolution 1973, u.


n.
doc.


s/res/1973 (2011), [authorizing intervention in libya],  4, 6.
159  borders and duties to the displaceddisplaced over half the syrian population and killed hundreds of thousands of civilians  is also evident.


the feasibility of military intervention to alleviate the crisis, however, is  unclear.
this does not undermine the idea that there is a responsibility to protect people  from atrocity and from being driven from home by mayhem when it is possible to do so.


the apparent lack of presently feasible ways to overcome the crisis in syria suggests that  intervention is not now called for by r2p.
i would argue, however, that the duty to protect  the syrian people does call for continuing political and diplomatic initiatives to find a path  toward their protection.


not only assad and the rebels, but also russia, iran, some gulf  states, and others are keeping the crisis in syria alive.
the global community, therefore, has  a duty to continue engage these powers diplomatically and possibly through other forms of  continuing engagement.


there is also continuing responsibility to the large number of syrians presently seeking  refuge in europe and other parts of the developed world.
at a minimum, we need to live up  to 1951 refugee conventions call for refugees fleeing persecution to be granted protection.


countries in europe and north america have the capability and resources to grant asylum  or refugee protection to a considerably larger number of syrians than is happening today.
the number of syrians seeking asylum in europe is not even close to the number already  within the borders of syrias neighbors (icg 2016).


when in the fall of 2015 uk prime  minister david cameron announced that his country would grant refugee protection to  20,000 syrians over the next five years, he was appropriately reminded that lebanon had  admitted  that  many  syrians  over  the  past  two  weekends.
indeed,  developing  countries  today host 86 percent of the worlds refugees, with the very poorest countries hosting 25  percent of the global total (unhcr 2015, 2-3).


the rich nations of the north have the  capability and therefore the responsibility to admit a larger number of refugees and asylum  seekers and to assist the poorer countries already hosting most of the worlds refugees.
a  substantial increase in the funds being provided to syrias neighbors for this burden sharing  by the north should be a priority today.


to achieve this, the rich nations of the northern hemisphere will have to overcome tendencies  to racially or religiously driven xenophobia and the mistaken fear that terrorists are often  refugees.
in addition, european powers such as france and the united kingdom that gained  economically from their colonies in africa and asia have duties to be open to refugees from  these regions.


a country with a history of military involvement in another nation can also  have special obligations to people in flight from that nation.
the united states recognized  its particular duty to receive refugees from vietnam after the vietnam war.


though the us  intervention in iraq was certainly not the sole cause of the displacement of many iraqis, it  was a significant factor that contributed to the political chaos that led to the huge forced  migration of iraqis that has occurred.
political scientist stephen walt recently observed that  if the united states and its allies had not invaded iraq in 2003, there would almost certainly  be no islamic state today (walt 2015).


thus there would be fewer people from iraq and  syria seeking asylum and refugee protection.
this deepens the duties of the united states  and its allies toward those refugees.


finally, it is well known that many observers believe there are good reasons to wonder whether  national self-interest may not overshadow the duties and prevent the actions advocated  here.
nevertheless, the work of martha finnemore and kathryn sikkink has shown that  advocacy for normative standards in some domains of contemporary international politics   160  journal on migration and human securityhas had significant positive impact (finnemore and sikkink 1998).


the standards of the  international law of refugee protection and for the regulation of armed conflict were the  result of normative advocacy by groups such as the red cross over the past century.
more  recently, though the icc is still a developing institution, normative entrepreneurs have  advanced the effort to hold political leaders accountable for violating normative standards in  several international tribunals.


this suggests that, contrary to the standard realist argument,  ethical standards can come to have real impact on the conduct of nations.
there is hope,  therefore, that the september 2016 un summit on refugees and migrants can lead to  genuine innovation in the protection of refugees and other victims of war and humanitarian  crisis.


normative pressure from nongovernmental bodies, including religious communities  and faith-based agencies, can make important normative contributions to action more fully  in accord with the responsibilities incompletely sketched in this article.
iv.


conclusion the refugee crisis that is occurring today means that the high moral value that has been  assigned to national borders and state sovereignty in the modern, westphalian international  system must be reassessed.
human rights have been proclaimed as universal norms, and  this universality can be supported by secular philosophies such as that developed by kant  and by the major religious traditions of the world, including judaism, christianity, and  islam.


these rights require that all political actors, both states and non-state agents, refrain  from grave abuses of human rights such as war crimes, crimes against humanity, and other  abuses that effectively treat people as if they were not human at all.
atrocities such as these  are among the major causes of refugee movement and other forms of forced migration  today.


acting  to  prevent  such  crimes  and  holding  accountable  those  who  nevertheless  commit them will be a crucial step in making the global system of refugee protection more  adequate.
doing  so  should  be  a  main  objective  at  the  september  2016  united  nations  summit, and elsewhere as well.


similarly, taking positive steps to come to the aid of those  who have been driven from home will be essential to a more effective refugee regime.
the  duty to provide such assistance to those already displaced falls on neighboring countries,  on those in the local region, and on the global community as a whole.


the responsibility  of countries to provide help is proportional both to their proximity to those in need and,  more importantly today, to their capacity to provide effective assistance.
the rich nations  of europe, north america, and the oil-rich gulf states thus have urgent duties to assist  the very poor countries who are hosting most of the worlds refugees today.


developing  fair and politically effective ways of assigning the share of the responsibility that different  developed nations should carry will be essential to the creation of a more effective refugee  system.
it will be a great disappointment if the september 2016 meeting at the un general  assembly fails to make substantial progress on this task.


but while the leadership of the  united nations and its constituent national governments is essential, the task is not theirs  alone.
many humanitarian ngos, both secular and faith-based, have broad experience in  responding to the needs of the displaced across national borders.


these organizations are  thus well positioned to help in the development of a system that is more effective.
hearing  their voices will be important as revisions in the refugee regime are being considered.


it can  be hoped that all available practical wisdom will be drawn upon to create more adequate  ways of responding to the present crisis.
many millions of lives are at stake.


