redefining american families:  the disparate effects of iiriras  automatic bars to reentry and  sponsorship requirements on  mixed-citizenship couples  jane lilly lpez1   university of california, san diego  executive summary with  passage  of  the  illegal  immigration  reform  and  immigrant  responsibility  act  of  1996  (iirira),  the  goal  of  discouraging  illegal  immigration  and  the  legal  immigration  of  the  poor  triumphed  over  the  longstanding  goal  of  family  unity  in  us  immigration  policy.
this  shift  resulted in policy changes that prevent some mixed-citizenship families  from accessing family reunification benefits for the immigrant relatives of  us citizens.


two specific elements of iirira  (1) the three- and 10-year  bars to reentry, and (2) the minimum income thresholds for citizen sponsors  of immigrants  have created a hierarchy of mixed-citizenship families,  enabling some to access all the citizenship benefits of family preservation  and reunification, while excluding other, similar families from those same  benefits.
this  article  details  these  two  key  policy  changes  imposed  by  iirira and describes their impact on mixed-citizenship couples seeking  family reunification benefits in the united states.


mixed-citizenship couples  seeking family reunification benefits do not bear the negative impacts of  these two policies evenly.
rather, these policies disproportionately limit  specific  subgroups  of  immigrants  and  citizens  from  accessing  family  reunification.


low-income,  non-white  (particularly  latino),  and  less- educated  american  families  bear  the  overwhelming  brunt  of  iiriras  narrowing of family reunification benefits.
as a result, these policy changes  have  altered  the  composition  of  american  society  and  modified  broader  notions  of  american  national  identity  and  who  truly  belongs.


most  of  the  disparate  impact  between  mixed-citizenship  couples  created  by  the  iirira would be corrected by enacting minor policy changes to (1) allow  the undocumented spouses of us citizens to adjust their legal status from  within the united states, and (2) include the noncitizen spouses income  earning potential toward satisfying minimum income requirements.
1     this research was supported by the national science foundation and the university of california institute  for mexico and the united states (uc mexus).


2017 by the center for migration studies of new york.
all rights reserved.


jmhs volume 5 number 2 (2017): 236-251introduction since  the  earliest  laws  regulating  immigration  into  the  united  states  were  enacted  in  the late nineteenth century, preserving family unity and facilitating the reunification of  families have been central tenets of immigration legislation (colon-navarro 2007; lee  2013).
historically, this focus on maintaining and restoring family unity enabled american  citizens immigrant spouses (regardless of their legal status) to adjust their status while  maintaining residence in the united states.


the family reunification precedent also led to  provisions facilitating the reunification of us citizens and permanent residents with their  immediate family members, regardless of personal income.
but in the illegal immigration  reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 (iirira), the goals of discouraging  illegal immigration and the legal immigration of the poor overpowered the longstanding  prioritization of family unity.


to achieve these goals, the iirira created rules that (a)  require citizen sponsors of immigrant relatives to meet a minimum income standard, and  (b) mandate deportation and other severe penalties for any immigrants who entered the  united states without inspection, regardless of their relationships with us citizens (gimpel  and edwards 1999; chacn 2007a; hagan et al.
2008; hwang and parreas 2010).


two  specific elements of iirira  the three- and 10-year bars to reentry and the minimum  income  thresholds  for  citizen  sponsors  of  immigrants    have  created  a  hierarchy  of  mixed-citizenship families, enabling some to access all the citizenship benefits of family  preservation and reunification while preventing other families from enjoying those same  benefits (enchautegui & menjvar 2015).
this article details these two key policy changes imposed by iirira and describes their  impact on mixed-citizenship couples seeking family reunification benefits in the us.


these  couples, living both within and outside the united states  some winners and others  losers  exemplify the real and lasting effects of the law in practice (abrego 2015).
the position of these families along the spectrum of legal statuses, as created through  immigration  laws,  determine[s  their]  access  to  goods  and  services  while  also  shaping  their sense of belonging in us society (menjvar et al.


2016, 28).
family reunification  benefits  enabled  some  couples  to  ensure  that  all  family  members  acquired  legal  status  in the united states.


these families have overwhelmingly thrived in the united states,  integrating economically, politically, and socially into their communities and the broader  national fabric.
for many us citizens, as they have seen the promises of their citizenship  play out in their families lives, the experience of sharing us citizenship with their spouses  has made them feel more american than ever before (lpez 2017).


but other families  have not fared so well.
some continue to live in the shadows in the united states, clinging  to hope that relief will come before they are detected and deported (fix and zimmerman  2001; chacn 2007b; krikorian 2007).


others have either chosen or been forced to leave  the united states for 10 or more years, with citizen spouses and children suffering exile  alongside  immigrant  relatives  deemed  unwelcome  (dhs  2009;  lpez  2015).
and  still  other families endure long-term separation or dissolve altogether as the stresses, suffering,  and pain of deportation and prolonged separation overwhelm family bonds (dreby 2012).


mixed-citizenship couples seeking family reunification benefits do not bear the negative  impacts of these two policies evenly.
rather, these policies only limit specific subgroups of  mixed-citizenship couples from accessing family reunification: (1) those whose noncitizen   237  redefining american familiesspouse  crossed  the  border  without  inspection  at  a  port  of  entry,2  and  (2)  those  whose  citizen spouse has low economic capital.


3 this unequal distribution of family reunification  benefits has disproportionately impacted non-white (especially latino), low-income, and  less-educated american mixed-citizenship families.
these changes reach beyond the lives  of mixed-citizenship couples to american society as a whole, reshaping the composition  of society and altering broader notions of national identity and belonging in american  society (demleitner 2004; ngai 2004; hawthorne 2007; lee 2013).


iirira bars to reentry and minimum income thresholds bars to reentry.
in the twenty years since the passage of iirira, citizens and noncitizens  alike have experienced the drastic and often devastating effects of the iiriras three- and  10-year bars to reentry imposed upon undocumented immigrants who leave the united  states  (lofgren  2005;  lundstrom  2013;  martnez  de  castro  2013;  enchautegui  and  menjvar 2015).


any individual who has lived without legal authorization in the united  states for more than six months but less than one year faces a three-year ban from applying  for legal permission to enter the united states; any individual who has lived without legal  authorization in the united states for more than one year faces a 10-year ban from applying.
the bar is automatically imposed when the individual leaves the physical territory of the  united states (cianciarulo 2015).


while this harsh penalty of iirira seemingly punishes visa overstayers and those who  entered the united states without inspection equally  subjecting all to the automatic  bars    one  subgroup  of  undocumented  immigrants  receives  disparate  treatment  under  the law: the undocumented spouses of us citizens (cianciarulo 2015).
4 immigration law  enacted prior to iirira allows visa-overstaying spouses of us citizens  undocumented  immigrants who had previously been admitted to the united states through an official port  of entry  to adjust to legal immigrant status from within the united states.


the ability  to adjust status from within the united states allows the undocumented (visa-overstaying)  spouse  in  these  marriages  to  obtain  legal  permanent  residency  without  triggering  the  automatic bars to reentry.
undocumented spouses of us citizens never processed at a us  port of entry must return to their countries of origin to complete their adjustment to legal  status.


upon leaving the united states to attend the consular interview, the undocumented  spouse triggers the automatic bars to reentry and thus becomes ineligible for a visa for  the duration of the three- or 10-year period, whether or not she would otherwise qualify  for legal entry.
5 prior to iirira, this distinction between families may have caused some   2    these  undocumented  immigrants  tend  to  be  lower  income  and  less  educated;  also,  they  are  almost  exclusively  immigrants  from  mexico  and  central america  (henderson  2014;  migration  policy  institute  2016).


3   low-income workers are disproportionately less educated, female, and non-white (us census bureau  2016c).
4  a recent opinion of the ninth circuit court of appeals confirms that nonimmigrants with temporary  protected status (tps)  including those who entered the us without inspection  should be considered  legally admitted (not undocumented) for the purposes of adjustment to permanent legal immigration status  and can adjust their status from within the united states (ramirez v.


brown no.
14-35633 (9th cir.


2017)).
5   iirira does allow for couples facing the multiyear bars to reentry to apply for an extreme hardship  waiver, which waives the bars to reentry for waiver recipients.


in order to qualify for a waiver, couples   238  journal on migration and human securitytemporary hardship for those couples required to return to the immigrants home country  to complete the adjustment process, but did not generally impact one group more than the  other over the long term.
but the automatic bars imposed through iirira have significantly  altered the trajectories of these different mixed-citizenship families (mercer 2008; kelly,  and dalmia 2011; cianciarulo 2015).


some families continue to easily adjust to legal status,  permanently establish their homes in the united states, and enjoy the rights and privileges  of formal membership in society.
others must choose either to maintain their precarious  position as undocumented families within the united states or leave the country and likely  face a three- or 10-year (or, in some cases, permanent6) bar to legal re-entry to the united  states.


the profile of undocumented immigrants who overstayed a visa differs significantly from  that of undocumented immigrants who crossed the border without inspection.
immigrants  seeking tourist, student, or other temporary visas are required to prove sufficient funds to  cover expenses in the united states .


.
.


[permanent] residence [in the home country] .
.


.
and other binding ties that will ensure their departure from the united states at the end of  the visit (bureau of consular affairs 2015, 2; emphasis added).


thus, visa overstayers  generally belong to their countries middle and upper classes and tend to be better educated  and more fluent in english than undocumented immigrants who entered the united states  without inspection (murray 2013, 1).
visa overstayers are also more likely to be nationals  of european, asian, african, and south american countries (murray 2013).


in contrast, due  to geographic proximity and physical access to the us border, undocumented immigrants  who  entered  the  country  without  inspection  almost  exclusively  hail  from  mexico  and  central america and, at the time of migration, generally did not have the financial and  social binding ties necessary to qualify for a visa (warren and kerwin 2017; menjvar  et al.
2016).


these undocumented migrants are also disproportionately male (baker and  rytina 2013).
the incongruent profiles of these two types of undocumented immigrants, combined with  their  disparate  treatment  under  the  law,  results  in  vastly  different  outcomes  for  mixed- citizenship  families  seeking  family  preservation  and  reunification  benefits.


us  citizens  who marry immigrants with legal immigrant status or those who overstayed a visa easily  access family reunification benefits and the right to legally establish their family within us  territory.
citizens who marry immigrants who crossed the border without documentation  do not.


this discrepancy in the law rewards some citizens for marrying the right kind of  undocumented immigrant (higher-class, better-educated, non-latino, female) and punishes  others for loving the wrong kind of undocumented immigrant (lower-class, less-educated,  latino, male) (golash-boza and hondagneu-sotelo 2013).
must prove significant hardship for the us citizen spouse and children above and beyond the financial and  emotional costs of deportation (fix and zimmerman 2001).


the obama administration implemented a policy  to allow couples to apply for the waiver before leaving the united states for the consular interview, which has  eliminated some of the risk of applying for the waiver (skrentny and lpez 2013).
but for families whose  waiver application is denied, they must either remain undocumented and at risk of deportation within in the  united states or leave the united states and wait out the multiyear bar to reentry.


6   undocumented spouses of us citizens who have been convicted of an aggravated felony, as defined  in the iirira, are often subject to additional penalties to legal reentry and, in some cases, are permanently  disqualified from obtaining any legal authorization to enter the united states (coonan 1998).
239  redefining american familiesminimum income thresholds.


iirira also introduced new minimum income requirements  for us citizens seeking to sponsor a spouse for legal permanent residency.
these thresholds  have  placed  new  limitations  on  mixed-citizenship  families,  disproportionately  affecting  lower  educated,  female,  and  disabled  citizens    as  well  as  citizens  with  children    seeking to sponsor a noncitizen spouse for legal immigrant status (hwang and parreas  2010).


before the iirira, citizen spouses were not required to prove a certain level of  income in order to successfully sponsor a noncitizen spouse for permanent residency in  the united states.
the minimum income threshold imposed by iirira  proven income  of at least 125 percent of the poverty level7  prevents otherwise qualified citizens with  insufficient income from sponsoring a spouse for permanent residency in the united states  (hayes 2001).


8  this inequity stems primarily from the fact that only the us citizen spouses income may be  considered in meeting the minimum income threshold.
despite the fact that the noncitizen  spouse would have permission to work once granted lawful permanent residency, a sponsor  must satisfy the minimum income requirement without considering the ability of her spouse,  once inside the united states, to contribute to the familys income.


a single minimum- wage earner working full time could not meet the minimum income requirement, but a  family income composed of two minimum-wage salaries could (aspe 2016; center for  poverty research 2016).
this means many citizen sponsors earning minimum wage (who  tend to have lower levels of education) could not qualify for family reunification benefits.


furthermore, women are more likely to fall below the required income threshold, given that  they only earn 80 cents for every dollar a man earns (us census bureau 2016b).
blacks  and latinos are also at a disadvantage, as their median household income falls $20,000 and  $11,000, respectively, below the national median income ($56,516), decreasing their odds  of satisfying the minimum income threshold (us census bureau 2016a).


the minimum  income  requirement  also  penalizes  citizens  with  disabilities  or  other  health  issues  that  prevent them from working full time.
finally, the minimum income threshold is determined  based on family size; citizen sponsors with children from their current or previous marriage  must meet a higher income threshold than those without children.


us citizens with one  or more of these traits who seek to sponsor a spouse for lawful permanent residency face  additional  barriers  to  accessing  family  reunification  benefits.
preventing  consideration  of the noncitizen spouses earning potential in satisfying the minimum income threshold  further exaggerates these inequalities.


while this policy may seem a logical safeguard to ensure that visa recipients will not become  public charges, it ultimately punishes citizens for having limited financial resources and  potentially prevents those citizens from rising out of poverty through the financial support   7   this is a sliding scale based on family size.
a sponsor who is single or married with no children would have  to meet the income thresholds for a household of two (the citizen sponsor plus the immigrant spouse/fianc);  sponsors with children and/or other dependents must prove sufficient income for a household that includes  themselves, all of their dependents, and the immigrant spouse being sponsored.


8   while a third party could step in as financial sponsor of the noncitizen spouse in the case that the citizens  income is insufficient, the third party must be willing to accept legally enforceable financial responsibility  for the visa applicant for the duration of her stay within the united states (even if the marriage dissolves).
financial responsibility remains in force until the immigrant (a) becomes a citizen, (b) accrues forty quarters  (ten years) of employment history in the united states, or (c) returns to her country of citizenship (uscis  2013).


securing an outside sponsor under these conditions can be very difficult.
240  journal on migration and human securityof their noncitizen spouses (lemay 2007; hayes 2001).


this policy may not only not keep  out potential public charges, but it could actually cause us citizens to become public  charges themselves (through the use of social welfare benefits) by preventing them from  increasing their combined family income through family reunification.
the effects of iirira on mixed-citizenship couples many  immigrants  in  the  united  states  form  part  of  a  mixed-citizenship  family.


the  2011 american communities survey data suggest that 7.
8 percent of all married couple  households in the united states  approximately 4.


1 million households  are mixed- nativity couple households (one us-born spouse, one foreign-born spouse) (larsen and  walters  2013).
this  includes  couples  with  different  immigration  statuses    foreign- born spouses could have legal permanent residency, temporary legal immigration status,  undocumented status, or us citizenship through naturalization.


9 millions of mixed-status  couples  composed  of  a  us  citizen  spouse  and  an  immigrant  with  legal  status  (legal  permanent  residency,  student/work  visa,  etc.
)  are  living  throughout  the  united  states,  with their ranks growing by more than 250,000 each year (monger and yankay 2012).


an  additional nine million people  roughly three percent of the us population  form part  of an unauthorized mixed-citizenship family, with both undocumented immigrant and  us citizen family members (taylor et al.
2011).


many other mixed-citizenship families  live outside of the united states, often as a result of harsh immigration laws that prevent  these families from living together within the united states.
recent data from the migrant  border crossing study show that about one-half of mexican deportees have a us citizen  family member, such as a spouse, child, and/or sibling (slack et al.


2015).
between 2012 and 2016, i conducted in-depth, semi-structured interviews with 40 mixed- citizenship couples living within and outside the united states.


the interviews focused  on these couples day-to-day experiences, with a particular interest in how their mixed- citizenship status and the laws governing mixed-citizenship families created opportunities  for and/or placed limitations on their success as individuals and as a family.
in order to  capture some of the similarities and differences in mixed-citizenship families experience  that  could  be  affected  by  the  immigrant  spouses  home  country  while  minimizing  the  influence of cultural and linguistic differences, i limited my participant pool to mixed- citizenship couples with one us-citizen spouse and one non-us citizen spouse10 from any  (spanish-speaking) latin american country.


any such couple was eligible to participate,  regardless  of  both  spouses  age,  race,  ethnicity,  gender,  or  current  place  of  residence.
twenty-eight of the mixed-citizenship couples were living in various regions of the united  states,  including  the  midwest,  south,  west,  and  southwest,  at  the  time  the  interviews  were conducted; 12 of the couples were living outside the united states (in mexico and  guatemala) when they were interviewed for the study.


to recruit participants, i directly  spouses  have  9    larsen  and  walters  naturalized,  while  38.
6  percent  remain  noncitizens  (due  to  their  ability  to  naturalize).


female  foreign-born  spouses  of  male  us-born  citizens  naturalize  at  higher  rates  than  male  foreign-born  spouses  of  female*  us-born  citizens  (63%  vs.
59%).


*at the time the data were collected, same-sex foreign-born spouses could not be legally sponsored by their  citizen spouses for permanent residency or citizenship.
10   at the time of marriage.


that  61.
3  percent  of   foreign-born  legal   (2013)   report   to  choice  or   impediments   241  redefining american familiescontacted  individuals  in  my  social  networks  who  met  study  criteria  or  who  i  believed  could  help  me  identify  potential  participants.


11 additionally,  many  of  the  interviewees  identified through this process recommended other interview candidates.
the us citizens  in the couples interviewed included 17 males and 23 females married to immigrants from  various latin american countries including mexico, colombia, guatemala, argentina, el  salvador, and chile.


12 two-thirds of the citizen participants spouses were undocumented  at the time they married, having either entered the united states without inspection or  overstayed a visa.
documentable families  documented, formerly documented, and documentable.


for many mixed-citizenship  couples, the two statutory changes enacted through iirira detailed above had no measurable  effect on their families.
because the noncitizen spouses (a) had not yet immigrated to the  united states, (b) already had legal immigrant status in the united states (even if temporary),  or (c) had overstayed a visa, the three- and 10-year bars did not apply to them.


furthermore,  because the us citizen spouses earned sufficient income to meet the minimum income  threshold, these families were able to acquire lawful permanent residency status relatively  easily.
this was the case for 16 couples i interviewed.


these couples agreed that acquiring  permanent  residency  for  the  noncitizen  spouse  was  an  involved  and  often  expensive  process, but they generally lauded the fact that the system works.
all of these couples  had established strong relationships in their communities, secured regular employment,  and confidently declared that they were living exactly where they wanted to be (whether  inside or outside the united states).


for these families, immigration law accomplished its  goal of preserving family unity.
these immigrant families also integrated well into their  new local and national communities.


this was especially the case for lola, whose husband  died unexpectedly a few years after their marriage.
despite the tragic loss of her husband   her only family member with us citizenship  lola continued to feel at home in the  united states and was in the process of acquiring citizenship for herself when we met.


she  expressed a strong sense of belonging to her new country and a commitment to continue  to build her life there as an active member of the community.
the other couples conveyed  similar satisfaction with their communities and felt strongly that they each belonged as an  american family.


undocumentable families  never  documented.
other  families  currently  residing  within  the  united  states  faced  a  less certain future.


with an undocumented spouse subject to the bars to reentry (should  she leave the country), most of these couples chose inaction with regard to seeking legal  immigration  status  (combined  with  hope  that  their  inaction  would  be  reciprocated  by  immigration authorities).
eight of the families i interviewed were living within the united   11   i was acquainted with approximately one-third of the interviewees prior to their involvement in the study.


12   all couples participating in this study were married, heterosexual couples.
because unmarried couples  cannot access any family reunification benefits, it was necessary to limit study participants to married couples.


while same-sex couples were eligible to participate, i was unable to identify any same-sex couples meeting  the other study criteria.
242  journal on migration and human securitystates with one undocumented spouse subject to the bars to reentry.


of these couples, only  two had even attempted to apply for family reunification (and an extreme hardship waiver);  the others cited the low probability of a successful application and the costly nonrefundable  application fee as primary drivers behind their decision not to apply.
in many ways, these  families mirrored those who had received family reunification benefits.


they also worked  hard, though many of the noncitizen spouses struggled to secure jobs with steady hours  and income.
they also planted roots in their communities, but the ever-present threat of  deportation (and lower official income) kept them from creating more permanent ties  to their neighborhoods, such as buying a home.


most of these families had a deportation  plan and knew more-or-less where they would go and what they would do if us law  enforcement deported the noncitizen spouse.
but, at the time they were interviewed, most  couples considered deportation a highly unlikely outcome.


13 rather than dwelling on the  looming possibility of deportation, they lived their lives as other normal families: raising  children, working, and actively participating in their communities.
they pushed forward in  good faith and hoped for a legal solution that would allow them to acquire legal permanent  residency  without  being  forced  to  live  apart  or  leave  the  united  states  for  a  decade.


while they acknowledged certain limits to their ability to progress without a family-level  legal status, most of these families preferred undocumented life in the united states to  establishing a new life outside of the united states.
and, as long as no one prevented them  from pursuing their life as a family in the united states, they would do their best to make it  work.


these families generally feel like they belong in their communities and that they are  american families, but the lack of official legal status looms large as they build a life in  the united states together as a family.
rejected.


for thousands of mixed-citizenship families, though, deportation is their reality.
eight  of  the  couples  i  interviewed  were  living  outside  the  united  states  as  a  result  of  deportation, voluntary removal, or the denial of the extreme hardship waiver during the  consular interview.


all of these couples wanted to live as a family in the united states;  many of them had already lived in the united states as a family for a significant amount  of time before the deportation.
14 all of these couples also faced the 10-year bar before  becoming  eligible  to  apply  for  legal  immigrant  status  within  the  united  states.


these  families expressed frustration, bitterness, and anger at a system that purports preserving  family unity as its primary goal but forced their family to move outside the united states  if they wanted to remain together.
some of these families were able to establish a cross- border life along the us-mexico border, maintaining ties to the united states even while  living  outside  it.


others  felt  completely  disconnected  from  the  united  states  and  their  extended family members left behind.
camille, sandra, and angelica spoke of the fear and  sadness they experienced while giving birth to children in the united states alone, as their  husbands could not cross the border to support them during labor.


deportees, like edgar  and joaquin, cited the pain of being a part of only half their childrens memories  the half  that doesnt take place in the united states.
even when these families found a way to stay  together outside the united states by moving abroad as a family unit, they continued to  experience the pain of separation from, for example, extended family living in the united  states with whom they now have only limited contact.


despite relocating together outside  the united states and trying their best to survive as a family, the strain of deportation   13   the interviews for this study were conducted before donald trump was elected president.
14   one couple met in mexico after the noncitizen spouse had been deported.


243  redefining american familiesresulted in divorce for at least two of these eight families.
in both cases, the couples cited  their forced removal from the united states and inability to return as a family to the united  states as the primary reason their marriages dissolved.


documented  (6)  formerly  documented  (6)  docu-  mentable (4)  spouse   granted  noncitizen  lawful  permanent  residency  by  us government  table  1.
types  of  (and  access  to)  legal  status  among  mixed-citizenship couples status   (no.


in sample) description d o c u m e n t a b l e  noncitizen spouse had legal immigrant  status  or  nonimmigrant status  (such  as  tourist  or  student  visa  or  tps)  when  couple  married;  citizen  spouse  had  sufficient income or support from others  to sponsor spouse for visa noncitizen  spouse  entered  the  united  states with a valid visa, but visa expired  (rendering  undocumented)  before  the  couple  married;  citizen  spouse had sufficient income or support  from others to sponsor spouse for visa noncitizen  spouse  was  living  outside  the  united  states  with  no  immigration  experience  to  the  united  states  when  couple  married;  citizen  spouse  had  sufficient income or support from others  to sponsor spouse for visa noncitizen  spouse  entered  the  united  states  without  crossing  through  a  port  of entry (entered without inspection,  or  ewi);  even  a  citizen  spouse  with  sufficient income could not successfully  sponsor  for  visa  without  receiving  emergency  hardship  waiver  (ehw) or waiting out 10-year ban  noncitizen  granted  lawful  permanent  residency  by  us government  spouse   noncitizen  granted  lawful  permanent  residency  by  us government  never  documented  (8)  spouse   spouse   legal outcome  spouse   living   noncitizen  spouse  in  united  states  remains  in  limbo  with no official legal status and  no access to official legal status  without leaving the united states  for 10+ years  noncitizen spouse is not allowed  to legally enter the united states  for  at  least  10  years;  citizen  must either acquire an ehw, be  separated from her spouse or live  outside  the  united  states  with  spouse for the duration of the bar  (or dissolve the marriage)  noncitizen spouse is not allowed  to legally enter the united states  u n d o c u m e n t a b l e  244  rejected (8)  noncitizen  spouse  entered  the  united  states without crossing through a port of  entry (ewi); spouse was later deported  or  voluntarily  removed  herself  from  the united states and became subject to  10+ year bar to reentry  too poor to  document  (6)  noncitizen  spouse  has  no  immigration  history  in  united  states  and  qualifies  for spousal visa; citizen spouse does not  have sufficient income or support from  others to sponsor spouse for visa  journal on migration and human securitytoo poor to document.
other couples whose spouses did not face the bars to reentry still  struggled to access family reunification benefits due to the minimum income thresholds  and the costs of applying for a visa.


six of the couples i interviewed had experienced  significant struggles in their efforts to acquire lawful permanent residency.
some endured  prolonged separation before and during the visa application process (which usually takes  at  least  one  year).


the  need  to  earn  sufficient  income  forced  carlos  to  miss  the  birth  of his daughter and the first 10 months of her life while he worked to meet the income  threshold necessary to sponsor his wife.
other couples had to rely on the generosity of  family members or friends, who legally assume financial responsibility for them, in order  to qualify for the visa.


nicole, a doctoral student, could not sponsor her fianc for the visa  because her income as a teaching assistant was insufficient to meet the income threshold.
luckily, her mother accepted legal responsibility for the couple so their application could  move forward.


oscar does not have family in the united states who can act as financial  sponsor for his wife, and they cannot qualify on his income.
so he continues to commute  weekly from a mexican border town to southern california, a world completely unknown  to his wife and daughter who wait for him just a few miles away in mexico.


otherwise  eligible mixed-citizenship families unable to meet the iirira-imposed income thresholds  find themselves excluded from family reunification benefits or, at best, forced to experience  extended family separation before they can qualify.
in these cases, the us citizens low- income status yields their families unworthy of the benefits of us citizenship.


as table 1 summarizes, the law differentiates mixed-citizenship couples into five different  groups, based on (a) the citizen spouses financial status, and (b) the noncitizen spouses  original mode of entry into the united states (if any).
based on those statuses, the law  then declares families either documentable or undocumentable.


15 all citizen spouses  must  demonstrate  sufficient  income  (or  find  a  friend  or  family  member  with  sufficient  income and willing to accept legal financial responsibility for the noncitizen spouse) in  order to qualify for family reunification benefits.
any couples unable to meet minimum  income  requirements  will  remain  undocumentable  until  their  financial  circumstances  change.


furthermore, even families with sufficient income  but with a history of never  documented status in the united states  are also labeled by the law as undocumentable.
this includes never documented families living within the united states and rejected  families forced to live outside the us.


the law prevents these families from becoming an  official american family and enjoying the benefits and freedoms associated with that  status.
as described above, the hardships undocumentable families experience as a result  of their status have significant and long-term negative impacts on the affected families and  their relationship to the us.


but these extreme hardships are not necessary.
two couples i interviewed who had married  before the implementation of iirira did not experience such drastic outcomes from the  family reunification process, despite the fact that both of the noncitizen spouses had lived  never documented in the united states before marriage.


rather than having to choose  between a life in the shadows or a 10-year exile, both of these couples applied for a visa,  traveled to the us consulate in ciudad jurez, mexico, for their interview and, within a few  15   although undocumentable status is not permanent, transitioning out of this status requires (1) acquiring  an exception to decade-long bars to reentry, (2) waiting out the 10-year bar outside the united states, and/ or (3) demonstrating an increase in income sufficient to meet minimum income standards.
thus, families  deemed undocumentable by the law generally experience this status as long-term.


245  redefining american familiesweeks, received the visa for permanent residency in the united states.
these couples have  thrived in their communities, raised children who played in marching band and took ballet  lessons, coached soccer teams, and served in parent-teacher organizations.


they are proud  american families who have worked hard to establish a good life for themselves and their  children in the united states.
their experiences align with those of the documentable  mixed-citizenship  couples  who  have  benefitted  from  family  reunification  post-iirira.


and their success as families suggests that the policies imposed by iirira punishing some  mixed-citizenship families are neither necessary nor productive.
redefining the american family in addition to directly impacting the lives of tens of thousands of mixed-citizenship families,  iirira also altered the definition of which kinds of couples and families qualify for official  membership in american society.


through the bars to reentry, iirira has redefined the  american family by effectively excluding mixed-citizenship families in which one partner  entered the united states without inspection from realizing the benefits of a married family  life in the united states.
given the economic and social thresholds required to qualify for  a tourist or other visa to the united states, this new definition of the un-american family  is generally limited to mixed-citizenship families in which the immigrant spouse came to  the united states with fewer economic resources and less formal education.


furthermore,  due to the physical and geographic realities of crossing the border without passing through  an official port of entry, the new un-american family is almost exclusively limited to  mixed-citizenship couples with immigrant spouses born in mexico or central america.
the disproportionate burden placed upon mixed-citizenship families by the bars to reentry  has  marked  families  with  less-educated,  lower-income  mexican  and  central american  spouses  as  unworthy  of  membership  in  an  official american  family.


furthermore,  the  iirira-imposed minimum income thresholds marked some us citizens as unworthy of  forming  an  official american  family  with  a  foreigner.
the  iirira  effectively  declared  poor americans undeserving of family reunification benefits in that it declared female,  non-white, and less-educated americans   those most likely to earn below 125 percent of  poverty level  unworthy of forming an official american family with a noncitizen.


this new, narrower definition of the american family  wealthier, whiter, better educated,  non-latino, and headed by a us citizen male  has not only precipitated the othering of  some immigrants, but also their citizen family members.
the iirira has marked all of them  as less-than and unqualified to enjoy the benefits of american citizenship as a family.


this  new definition of the american family also shapes broader notions of who belongs in  the united states (lee 2013; bunting 2015; darian-smith 2015).
preventing some families  from accessing family reunification benefits has ripple effects.


initially, it redefines which  families are american enough to qualify for family reunification.
then, by extension, it  also prevents the immigrant spouses who were denied family reunification benefits from  sharing those same benefits with their noncitizen parents, siblings, and children (hawthorne  2007).


this burden is not spread proportionally across nations of origin, socio-economic  classes, and racial and ethnic backgrounds, altering the composition of american citizenry  toward a richer, whiter, better-educated membership and further narrowing the definition  of both who deserves to be american and which americans deserve to enjoy the full  benefits of their citizenship.
246  journal on migration and human securitypolicy solutions  numerous policy solutions could easily resolve this devastating disparity in the treatment  of mixed-citizenship american families.


bars to reentry.
one option  though its effects would reach far beyond mixed-citizenship  couples  is to repeal the multiyear bars to legal reentry currently applied to almost all  undocumented  immigrants  upon  leaving  the  united  states.


though  the  bars  to  reentry  were designed to discourage undocumented immigrants from attempting to settle in the  united states, they have had little effect as a deterrent (lofgren 2005; lundstrom 2013).
repealing the bars to reentry would help many mixed-citizenship families adjust to legal  immigration status without facing the severe penalties currently imposed.


a more limited  approach would involve changing current law to allow all undocumented spouses of us  citizens to adjust to legal status from within the united states.
if readmission through a  port of entry remains a necessary bureaucratic or symbolic step, arrangements could be  made to allow such processing at international airports based within the united states once  applicants receive final visa approval, satisfying the letter of the law without invoking the  bars to reentry.


either of these policy solutions would also provide a quick and easy way of  reducing the size of the undocumented immigrant population residing in the united states  by allowing the undocumented spouses of us citizens to adjust to legal status.
including the  spouses of us citizens in any future dapa-esque executive action would provide at least  temporary relief for most mixed-citizenship couples in the united states, should political  opposition render other, permanent policy changes impossible to enact.


16  minimum  income  thresholds.
the  minimum  income  thresholds  should  be  repealed.


failing that, the potential earnings of the noncitizen spouse being sponsored should be  included toward meeting the minimum income thresholds.
disqualifying american citizens  from family reunification because they earn low wages perpetuates income inequality and  punishes us citizens for circumstances that are often beyond their control.


it also prevents  them from increasing their family income and economic opportunities by prohibiting their  reunification with an additional wage earner.
the  effects  of  iirira  have  proven  similar  to  many  other  us  immigration  laws  that,  intentionally or not, marked specific kinds of immigrants  based on their race, national  origin, and/or class  as unwelcome (luibhid 2002; ngai 2004; kanstroom 2007; lee  2013).


the discriminatory effects of these policies reach far beyond individual immigrants  to  their  families  and  communities.
as  policymakers  consider  every  policy  option    including the continuation of iirira and associated laws in their current form  they  must remember that laws targeting immigrants affect citizens, too (menjvar et al.


2016).
as  the  undocumented  population  in  the  united  states  continues  to  drop,  policymakers  should shift their attention away from punishing undocumented immigrants and toward  supporting and preserving american families, including those with an undocumented spouse  and/or  low  incomes  (warren  2016).


developing  policies  that  provide  opportunities  for  mixed-citizenship american families to succeed will reduce the undocumented immigrant  population while generating significant benefits for these families and the communities in  which they live (de graauw and bloemraad 2017).
16   under obamas proposed executive action, deferred action for parents of americans (dapa), only the  parents of citizens and permanent residents qualified for relief.


