book review  international migration, us  immigration law and civil society:  from the pre-colonial era to the  113th congress  edited by leonir mario chiarello and donald kerwin.
new  york,  ny:  scalabrini  international  migration  network  (simn), 2014.


177 pages.
breana george center for migration studies  the   of   passage   immigration  with  reform  legislation  stalled  in  the  house  of  representatives,  president  obama  announced  on  june  30,  2014  that  he  was  prepared  to  exercise  executive  authority  on immigration if congress had not acted  by the end of the august  recess.


in early  september,  however  the  administration  indicated that it would not move forward  with issuing an immigration directive until  after the november midterm elections due  to polarization over the issue (shear 2014).
the administration argued that prolonging  the  time  frame  to  act  would  allow  the  president  to  unveil  a  bolder  and  more  sustainable policy to provide administrative  relief to unauthorized immigrants (ibid.


).
a  new  book,  international  migration,  us  immigration  law  and  civil  society:  from  the  pre-colonial  era  to  the  113th  congress,  published  by  the  scalabrini  international  migration  network  (simn)  in  collaboration  with  the  center  for   migration  studies  of  new  york  (cms),  offers  an  overview  of  immigration  law  and policy that contextualizes the present  challenges in reaching policy consensus in  the immigration debate.


in  a  chapter  on  the  evolution  of  us  immigration laws, charles wheeler, senior  attorney at the catholic legal immigration  network  (clinic),  traces  the  history  of  immigration  law  and  policy  since  the  colonial  era.
this  history  illustrates  that  immigration  legislation  has  reflected  the  nations  political  climate,  diverse  values,  and  contested  visions  of  nationality  and  membership  over  time.


wheeler  likens  immigration  policy  to  a  swinging  pendulum of efforts to restrict and liberalize  admissions  policies,  and  points  out  that  immigration  results  only  after  years  of  debate,  incubation,  negotiation, and compromise (69).
in  the  faithful  execution  of  immigration  laws   the  us  constitutional  system,   legislation  often    2014 by the center for migration studies of new york.


all rights reserved.
jmhs volume 2 number 3 (2014): 251-256journal on migration and human security  the  executive  branch  and  rests  with  federal  immigration  agencies  have  the  authority to exercise discretion in deciding  whether or not to enforce the law against  individuals.


1 wheeler writes that the use of   [e]xecutive  power  to  exercise  discretion  in  the  enforcement  of  immigration  law  dates back to the first federal statutes and to  the inherent authority of law enforcement  agencies  to  determine  how  best  to  use  their limited resources (70).
he sets forth  several  examples  of  executive  discretion  in  the  immigration  arena,  some  statutory,  some implicit in the executives authority  to enforce the law:     the  delegated  agencies  have  been  able  to  apply  case-by-case  leniency,  as  reflected  in  the  following  powers:  humanitarian  parole;  the  setting  of  bonds;  the  authority  to  suspend  or  cancel deportation or waive grounds for  inadmissibility  based  on  evidence  of  hardship; the exercise of prosecutorial  discretion  on  whether  to  commence  removal  proceedings;  the  granting  of  deferred action status to the sick or  elderly;  release  from  detention  under  orders  of  supervision;  and  waiving  non-immigrant  visa  requirements  for  citizens from countries with a history  of low visa fraud.


(ibid)  at different times in us history, the exercise  of prosecutorial discretion has been used to  suspend  the  enforcement  of  immigration  laws  toward  particular  groups  of  non- citizens.
forms  of  administrative  relief  available  to  the  executive  branch  include   1  memorandum from the congressional research  service  prepared  for  distribution  to  multiple  congressional  requesters,  analysis  of  june  15,  2012 dhs memorandum, exercising prosecutorial  discretion with respect to individuals who came  to the united states as children, 13 july 2012, 5.


http://shusterman.com/pdf/crsdeferredactionmemo.
pdf?


3856b4.
from   deferred  action,  which  grants  temporary  protection  removal  and  work  authorization.


prosecutorial discretion has  also included blanket or categorical relief  from deportation through deferred enforced  departure  (ded)  and  extended  voluntary  departure (evd) for foreign nationals who  are unable to or fear return due to conditions  in their country of origin.
2 in addition, the  secretary of the department of homeland  security  (dhs)  can  grant  parole-in-place  to allow noncitizens to remain lawfully in  the  united  states  based  on  humanitarian  concerns.


3 these forms of temporary relief  do not make recipients eligible to adjust to  lawful permanent resident status (lpr) or  provide  a  pathway  to  citizenship,  which  would require an act of congress.
formal  guidance  on  the  exercise  of  prosecutorial discretion by federal agencies  has  developed  since  the  mid-1970s.


in  2000,  an  immigration  and  naturalization  service  (ins)  memorandum,  exercising  prosecutorial  discretion,  issued  by  commissioner doris meissner, stated that:  like all law enforcement agencies, the ins  has finite resources, and it is not possible to   2  a list of these administrative actions from 1976  to  2012  compiled  by  the  congressional  research  service is available at: https://www.
google.com/ur l?


sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&c ad=rja&uact=8&ved=0cb4qfjaa&url=http%3a %2f%2fshusterman.com%2fpdf%2fcrsdeferreda ctionmemo.
pdf%3f3856b4&ei=bbizvp73fcp-yq ts8ogwca&usg=afqjcneblzib8hf7lwenwcx nxqaonvkm2w&bvm=bv.


75097201,d.
aww.


a  may  2012  letter  from law  professors  to president  obama  on  the  authority  to  grant  administrative  relief for dream act beneficiaries stated: almost  every  administration  since  president  dwight  d.
eisenhower  has  granted  ded  or  the  analogous  extended voluntary departure to at least one group  of  noncitizens  (see  http://wfc2.


wiredforchange.
com/dia/track.


jsp?
v=2&c=zgsevtjvem4ylkpfe 0ftdgwurddpvahc).


3   in  addition,  temporary  protected  status  (tps)  may be granted to groups from designated countries.
for a more detailed discussion, see kerwin 2014.


252  journal on migration and human securityinvestigate  and  prosecute  all  immigration  violations.
the  memorandum  instructed  agency  officials  to  exercise  discretion  in a judicious manner at all stages of the  enforcement process.


in 2011, immigration  and customs enforcement (ice) director  john  morton  issued  a  memorandum  with  further  guidance  on  factors  that  immigration  officials  should  consider  in  weighing the exercise of discretion based  on enforcement priorities.
factors include  age,  with  particular  consideration  given  to  minors  and  the  elderly;  serious  health  conditions;  strong  ties  to  the  community;  whether  a  person  represents  a  national  security  or  public  safety  concern;  length  of  presence  in  the  united  states;  the  circumstances  of  the  persons  arrival  to  the  united  states,  particularly  if  he  or  she came to the united states as a child;  and the pursuit of education in the united  states.


4  based  on  the  existing  guidelines  for  prosecutorial  discretion,  the  deferred  action  for  childhood  arrivals  (daca)  program  gives  deferred  action  to  young  people  brought  to  the  united  states  as  children  whom  the  administration  has  deemed a low priority group for deportation  (see motomura 2014).
the program, which  represents the most recent and ambitious  use  of  executive  discretion  (kerwin  2014),  has  provided  work  authorization  and temporary protection from removal to  approximately  600,000  recipients  since  it  was  initiated  in  2012  (batalova,  hooker,  and capps 2014).


president obama has charged the heads of  dhs  and  the  department  of  justice  with   4   memorandum  from  john  morton,  director  of  immigration  and  customs  enforcement  (ice),  exercising  prosecutorial  discretion  consistent  with the civil immigration enforcement priorities  for  the  agency  for  apprehension,  detention  and  removal  of  aliens,  17  june  2011,  4.
http://www.


ice.gov/doclib/foia/prosecutorial-discretion/pd_ cnstnt_w_civil_imm_enforce_ice_priorities.
pdf.


formulating possible options for executive  action  that  could  provide  administrative  relief to a greater share of the population  of  more  than  11  million  unauthorized  immigrants.
options  under  consideration  include  extending  deferred  action  to  a  wider  pool  of  youth  under  the  daca  program  through  adjusting  the  eligibility  requirements  related  to  age,  length  of  residence,  and/or  educational  attainment  (capps,  rosenblum,  and  bachmeier  2014).


the administration could also grant  deferred  action  to  additional  populations  like  the  family  members  of  us  citizens,  lprs or daca beneficiaries.
according to  migration policy institute (mpi) estimates,  3.


5  million  unauthorized  immigrants  are  parents  of  us  citizens  under  the  age  of  18,  and  up  to  3.
7  million  are  parents  of  children who are either green card holders  or daca recipients (ibid.


).
mpi estimates  also  show  that  the  length  of  residence  in  the  united  states  would  be  an  important  factor  defining  the  scope  of  possible  deferred  action.


whereas  an  estimated  3  million  unauthorized  immigrants  have  resided in the country for 15 years or more  and  5.
7  for  at  least  10  years,  8.


5  million  have  been  present  for  at  least  five  years  (ibid.
).


in  addition  to  deferred  action,  the  administration  has  indicated  that  it  is  considering the refinement of immigration  enforcement priorities that would minimize  the  deportation  of  particular  groups  of  individuals if they are apprehended (ibid.
).


the presidents consideration of executive  action has prompted debate over the legal  authority to expand immigration relief.
in  a september 3rd letter to the president, 136  law professors affirmed the administrations  legal  authority  to  exercise  prosecutorial  discretion as means to protect individuals  or  groups  from  deportation.


5  the  letter   5  letter to president obama from law professors  regarding executive authority to protect individuals   253  journal on migration and human securitythe   longstanding  use  of  highlighted  prosecutorial discretion in the immigration  system, and across all enforcement contexts,  as being grounded in the constitution and  recognized by court decisions, immigration  statute,  regulations,  and  policy  guidance.
notably,  in  2012  the  supreme  court  emphasized  the  broad  discretion  of  federal officials in its decision on arizonas  s.


b.
1070.


6 through the immigration and  nationality  act  (ina),  congress  confers  upon dhs the authority to administer and  enforce immigration laws.
the professors  contend that congress has also implicitly  acknowledged  immigration  prosecutorial  discretion insofar as its appropriations for  immigration  enforcement  have  fallen  far  below  the  actual  number  of  removable  people  in  the  united  states.


7  the  legal  recognition  of  prosecutorial  discretion  is  further recognized by congress in the inas  bar  on  the  judicial  review  of  decisions  to  commence  removal  proceedings,  to  adjudicate  cases,  and  to  execute  removal  orders.
legal  scholars  have  also  affirmed  that  the  president  exercised  his  executive  authority  consistent  with  rule  of  law  principles through the adoption of a formal  process by which daca relief is granted  on  a  case-by-case  basis8  in  a  uniform,  predictable,  non-discriminatory  manner (motomura 2014).


in  a  lengthy  law  review  article,  zachary  price,  a  visiting  assistant  professor  at  the  university of california, hastings college  of law, takes a very different view, arguing  or  groups  from  deportation,  3  september  2014  [hereinafter law professors letter], https://law.
psu.


edu/_file/law-professor-letter.
pdf.


6  arizona v.
united states, 132 s.


ct.
2492, 2499  (2012).


7  law professors letter.
8  even when a deferred action program covers a  particular  group,  each  individual  must  submit  an  application  which  is  screened  on  a  case-by-case  basis.


daca  recipients  must  reapply  every  two  years.
and   the  constitutions   that  while  the  authority  for  prosecutorial  discretion is grounded in the constitution,  this  authority  is  limited  and  defeasible  (price  2014,  674).


price  distinguishes  between  case-by-case  discretion  and  immunizing  broad  categories  of  persons  from  enforcement.
he  contends  that  the  daca  program  falls  outside  of  the  proper scope of executive authority in its  application of a categorical policy of non- enforcement  toward  a  particular  group  which  has  already  been  deemed  a  low- enforcement  priority.


price  argues  that  daca goes beyond the mere prioritization  of enforcement resources (ibid.
, 761).


he  cites  the  use  of  executive  policymaking  through  nonenforcement  by  george  w.
bush and other recent administrations and  cautions  that  executive  nonenforcement  authority, if unbounded, could substantially  reorder  separation  of  powers  framework  [and]  provide  presidents with a sort of second vetoan  authority to remake the law on the ground  without asking congress to revise the law  on the books (ibid.


, 674).
the daca program was a major political  victory for the pro-reform movement and  it highlights the growing influence of civil  society  in  immigrant  communities  and  the us immigration debate.


in a chapter  complementing  wheelers  history  of  us  immigration law, sara campos, a freelance  writer and the former director of the asylum  program  for  the  lawyers  committee  for  civil  rights  in  san  francisco,  charts  the  role  of  civil  society  in  shaping  immigration  policy  from  the  passage  of  the  immigration  reform  and  control act  of 1986 to the present.
campos reports that  when  comprehensive  immigration  reform  legislation  which  would  have  included  the  dream act9  failed  to  pass  in  2007,  9   the  development,  relief,  and  education  for  alien  minors  act  (dream)  act  would  provide  legal status and a pathway to citizenship to eligible   254  journal on migration and human securityunauthorized  youth  re-evaluated  their  agenda  and  began  to  build  a  movement  to  influence  the  broader  immigrant  rights  agenda.


this gave rise to the founding of  the  united  we  dream  network  in  2008  which encompasses 47 organizations from  24  states  (137).
in  the  spring  of  2012,  the  obama  administration  announced  the  daca  program  following  months  of  concerted advocacy by unauthorized youth  and the united we dream network.


at the  time  daca  was  announced,  advocates  hoped  that  it  would  be  followed  by  immigration reform legislation that would  enact permanent relief.
in the interim, the  implementation of the program has served  as  a  test  run  for  a  future  legalization  program (138).


groups  have  other  civil  vociferously  comprehensive  immigration  reform.
campos  recounts  that  while  the  immigration  reform  bill  was under debate in 2007, numbersusa,  lobbying  organization,  a  orchestrated  a  stream  of  more  than  one  million  calls  and  faxes,  causing  the  congressional switchboard to break down  (134).


more  recently,  numbersusa  has  provided  substantial  support  to  a  lawsuit  filed  by  ice  agents  against  the  obama  administration  challenging  the  directives  on  prosecutorial  discretion  issued  in  the  morton  memorandum  and  by  dhs  on  daca,10 which, they claim, order them to  act  in  violation  of  federal  laws  (manetas  2013).
campos  account   illustrates  how   society  opposed   restrictionist   the   unauthorized youth who were brought to the united  states as children.


10  memorandum from janet napolitano, secretary  of  homeland  security,  exercising  prosecutorial  discretion with respect to individuals who came  to  the  united  states  as  children,  15  june  2012.
http://www.


dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/s1-exercising- prosecutorial-discretion-individuals-who-came-to- us-as-children.
pdf.


senate-passed immigration reform bill (s.
744) reflects the intense advocacy of civil  society  stakeholders  on  both  sides  of  the  debate.


she  concludes:  what  legislation  might  result  and  whether  congress  in  its  current  polarized,  partisan  state  will  be  capable of enacting reform in the near-term  remains to be seen.
what is certain is that  civil society is more robust than it has ever  been, will remain active in the immigration  debate, and will be ready for reform if and  when it comes (161).


international  migration,  us  immigration  law  and  civil  society:  from  the  pre- colonial  era  to  the  113th  congress  also  includes an introductory essay by donald  kerwin, cmss executive director, and a  chapter by joseph chamie, former director  of  the  population  division  of  the  united  nations, on migration to the americas over  the  last  500  years.
the  book  is  the  tenth  in  a  series  of  publications  by  simn  on  immigration policy and civil society in the  western hemisphere.


