temporary protected status after  25 years: addressing the challenge  of long-term temporary  residents and strengthening a  centerpiece of us humanitarian  protection  claire bergeron1   executive summary since  1990,  the  united  states  has  offered  hundreds  of  thousands  of  noncitizens who are unable to return to their countries of origin because of  war or a natural disaster a vital form of humanitarian protection: temporary  protected status (tps).
while a grant of tps does not place a noncitizen on  a path to permanent residence, tps recipients receive protection against  deportation  and  temporary  permission  to  live  and  work  in  the  united  states.


nearly 25 years after the statutory creation of tps, however, the  use of the program has been the subject of some debate, largely because of  concerns over whether tps grants are truly temporary.
this paper examines the legal parameters of tps and traces the programs  legislative  history,  exploring  congressional  intent  behind  its  creation.


while  acknowledging  that  extended  designations  of  tps  are  often  the  result of long-running international crises, the paper argues that extended  tps designations are problematic for two reasons.
first, they run contrary  to congressional intent, which was to create a temporary safe haven for  individuals unable to return home due to emergency situations.


second,  continued  grants  of  tps  status  effectively  lock  tps  beneficiaries  into  a  legal  limbo,  rendering  them  unable  to  fully  integrate  into  life  in  the  united states.
this paper considers several administrative and legislative fixes to align  the tps program with the goal of providing temporary protection to certain  individuals that do not meet the refugee definition, while also ensuring   1  claire bergeron will graduate georgetown university law center in may of 2014 and will begin her  appointment as associate at wilmerhale in the fall.


she is deeply grateful to georgetown university professor  susan martin, who played a critical role in the development of this paper.
2014 by the center for migration studies of new york.


all rights reserved.
jmhs volume 2 number 1 (2014): 22-43that long-term immigrants in the united states are fully able to integrate  into the fabric of the country.


it considers:   amending the us definition of a refugee to enable more would-be tps   beneficiaries to qualify for asylum;    creating a new form of subsidiary protection for individuals who cannot   return home but do not meet the refugee definition;    permitting tps holders who have resided in the united states for a  certain number of years to adjust to lawful permanent resident (lpr)  status;    easing the ability of tps holders to take advantage of existing pathways   to permanent residence; and     implementing repatriation programs to assist former tps holders in   returning to their countries of origin.
this paper argues for the adoption of two of the above proposals.


it asserts  that the best way to realign the tps statutory regime with congressional  intent and the united states tradition of promoting full integration of long- term immigrants is to allow persons who have held tps status for more  than ten years to adjust to lpr status, while implementing a repatriation  program for those with shorter-term grants of tps that have ended.
introduction  the united states has long positioned itself as a global leader in responding to humanitarian  emergencies and sheltering those who are forced to flee their countries of origin.


in 2012, the  office of the united nations high commissioner for refugees (unhcr) reported that the  united states accepted just over 66,000 refugees for third-country resettlement, more than  twice the number accepted by all other third countries of resettlement combined (unhcr  2013, 163).
that same year, the united states granted asylum to 29,484 individuals who  sought refugee classification after arriving in the country (martin and yankay 2013, 1).


it also authorized the admission of up to 70,000 refugees in fy 2013,2 and an additional  70,000 in fy 2014.
3  however,    us  refugee  law  is  ill-equipped  to  serve  as  a  protection  mechanism  for  the  vast majority of individuals fleeing violent or unsafe conditions at home, even when they  make it into the united states.


us political asylum law is closely modeled after the 1951  convention relating to the status of refugees and the 1967 protocol relating to the status of  refugees.
it stipulates that to be granted asylum, a foreign national must demonstrate past  persecution or a well-founded fear of future persecution on account of one of five protected  grounds: race, religion, nationality, political opinion, or membership in a particular social   2  77 fed.


reg.
61507 (oct.


10, 2012).
3  78 fed.


reg.
62415 (oct.


21, 2013).
23  temporary protected status after 25 yearsgroup.


4 an individual seeking asylum must also show that he or she has an individualized  fearone that is particular to him or her as an individualrather than generally applicable  to all nationals of a particular country (seltzer 1992, 779).
as a result, individuals who  are not themselves individual targets of persecution, but who may have very real fears of  return, are excluded from the definition (martin, schoenholtz, and waller meyers 1997,  545).


recognizing that there are often compelling reasons for granting protection to individuals  who might not otherwise meet the strict refugee definition, us presidents since president  eisenhower have granted temporary protection to foreign nationals in the united states who  are unable to return to their home countries because of extraordinary circumstances, such  as war or natural disaster.
5 in 1990, congress expressly codified this practice by creating  temporary protected status (tps).


6 yet, nearly 25 years after congress created tps, the  use of the program has been the subject of some debate.
in particular, critics charge that  the us government has used tps to grant extended periods of legal status to otherwise  unauthorized immigrants, in contrast with congresss intent that the program be used only  for temporary protection (krikorian 2012).


finding a long-term solution to this challenge is vitally important at this juncture since the  demand for tps is likely to grow in the coming years.
several scholars have noted that  displaced migrants are just as likely to be fleeing war, generalized violence, or famine as  individually-targeted persecution (millbank 2000).


one recent report predicts an uptick in  political instability around the globe in the coming years (brown, 2013).
meanwhile, as  the world adapts to climate change and global warming, an increasing number of refugee- triggering events will likely be environmental, rather than man-made, catastrophes (ota  2012, 515).


in this context, many individuals fleeing harm will be unlikely to qualify for  refugee status or political asylum under us law because they will not be able to prove  that they have been individually targeted for persecution or would be targeted on account  of a protected ground.
for this reason, tps stands positioned to play a growing role in  providing humanitarian protection in the future.


temporary protected status on the ground: where did it  come from and what does it do?
under the immigration act of 1990, the secretary of the us department of homeland  security (dhs)7 is authorized to designate certain countries for tps when:   (a) [t]here is an ongoing conflict within [a] state and, due to such conflict, requiring  the return of aliens who are nationals of that state to that state (or to the part of the  state) would pose a serious threat to their potential safety; or  (b) (i) [t]here has been an earthquake, flood, drought, epidemic, or other environmental   4  ina  208(b) 5  h.


r.
rep.


no.
100-627, at 6 (1988).


6  pub.
l.


no.
101-649 (1990).


24  7  the 1990 immigration act originally delegated to the attorney general the ability to designate certain  countries for tps when they met the aforementioned criteria.
this authority was transferred to the dhs  secretary through the homeland security act of 2002, pub.


l.
no.


107-296, 116 stat.
2135 (2002).


journal on migration and human securitydisaster  in  the  state  resulting  in  a  substantial,  but  temporary,  disruption  of  living  conditions in the area affected; (ii) the foreign state is unable, temporarily, to handle  adequately the return to the state of aliens who are nationals of the state; and (iii) the  foreign state officially has requested the designation; or  (c)  [t]here  exist  extraordinary  and  temporary  conditions  in  the  foreign  state  that  prevent aliens who are nationals of the state from returning to the state in safety, unless  the secretary finds that permitting the aliens to remain temporarily in the united states  is contrary to the national interest of the united states.
8  tps  status  is  granted  to  all  nationals  of  a  particular  country  based  on  the  countrys  conditions, rather than the situation of a particular individual (as with asylum).


thus, tps  functions as a blanket form of relief for those who have left a particular nation (wasem  and ester 2010, 2).
pursuant to the law, an initial designation of a country for tps must be for no less than  six months, and no more than 18 months, though tps may be subsequently extended, or  a country may be re-designated.


9 to qualify for a grant of tps, a noncitizen in the united  states must demonstrate that he or she has been continuously physically present in the  united states since the effective date of the most recent designation of his or her country of  origin for tps, and that he or she has continuously resided in the united states since a date  designated by the dhs secretary.
an applicant must also register for tps in the timeframe  outlined by the dhs secretary and must be admissible as an immigrant.


10 individuals who would otherwise qualify for tps but who are inadmissible under section  212 of the immigration and nationality act (ina) generally may seek a waiver of their  ground of inadmissibility.
no waiver is available, however, for those who are inadmissible  by  virtue  of  having  committed  two  or  more  crimes  involving  moral  turpitude,  most  controlled substance offenses, and certain national security offenses.


in addition, individuals  who have committed one felony or two or more misdemeanors, as well as those who have  engaged in the persecution of others, are statutorily barred.
11  noncitizens  who  are  granted  tps  receive  work  authorization  and  protection  against  deportation.


12 they may also apply for advance parole, which gives them the ability to  travel outside the united states and be readmitted.
13 furthermore, noncitizens time in tps  status is not counted as unlawful presence for the purposes of subsequent immigration  applications.


14  a grant of tps, however, does not lead to any permanent immigration status in the united  states.
there is no legislation permitting tps holders to adjust their status to that of lawful  permanent residents (lprs); in fact, the 1990 immigration act expressly prohibited the  enactment of such legislation unless affirmatively approved by a three-fifths supermajority  of the senate.


15  8  ina  244(b) 9  ina  244(b) 10  ina  244(c) 11  ina  244(c) 12  ina  244(a) 13  ina  244(f) 14  ina  244(f) 15  ina  244(h)  25  temporary protected status after 25 yearssince the enactment of the 1990 law, 19 countries have been designated for tps (wasem  and ester 2010, 3; uscis 2014).
eight countriesel salvador, haiti, honduras, nicaragua,  somalia,  sudan,  south  sudan,  and  syriaare  currently  designated  (uscis  2014).


according to the most recent designations and extensions of tps in the federal register, an  estimated 340,310 people currently hold tps.
16 us citizenship and immigration services  (uscis) also estimates that an additional 9,000 syrians may be eligible for tps as a result  of the us governments 2013 decision to re-designate syria and advance the date from  which eligible applicants must show that they have been continuously physically present  to june 17, 2013.


17    tps legislative history: in search of a safe haven statute although  the  immigration act  of  1990  marked  the  first  time  that tps  was  codified  in  us  law,  the  united  states  had,  for  decades  before  1990,  granted  noncitizens  displaced  by  humanitarian  crises  or  environmental  disasters  a  form  of  protection  known  as  extended  voluntary  departure  (evd)  (frelick  and  kohnen  1995,  341).
evd  provided  an  administrative  mechanism  that  essentially  amounted  to  an  exercise  of  prosecutorial  discretion by the attorney general in deciding that individuals from certain countries would  not be pursued for removal.


though the attorney general ultimately decided whether to  grant evd, recommendations for grants of evd originated with the secretary of state,  who would notify the attorney general that the situation in a particular country warranted  suspending  deportations  (seltzer  1992,  784-85).
between  1960  and  1990,  the  attorney  general granted evd to nationals of 16 countries, including iran, poland, afghanistan,  ethiopia, and uganda.


the length of the deferral granted ranged from eight months, for  iran  (april  to  november  1979)  to  15  years,  for  lebanon  (february  1976  to  february  1991) (frelick and kohnen 1995, 341).
following the 1989 tiananmen square massacre,  president george h.


w.
bush granted a similar administrative reprieve from deportation,  known as deferred enforced departure (ded) to certain chinese nationals (frelick and  kohnen 1995, 342).


by the early 1980s, however, concerns were mounting over the discretionary nature of  evd and its perceived uneven application to different countries (macpherson 1985).
in  particular,  immigrant  advocates  expressed  concerns  over  the  reagan  administrations  refusal to grant evd to nationals of el salvador, despite growing evidence of political  instability and violence in that country (aclu 1984, 6-7).


between 1981 and 1984, groups  and individuals ranging from the united states catholic conference, the archbishop of  washington, dc, the immigration & refugee program of the church world service, the  american civil liberties union (aclu), and united states senator edward kennedy (d- ma) lobbied for the extension of evd to salvadorans (aclu 1984, 6-7).
executive branch  officials generally asserted that salvadorans in the united states were adequately protected  16  an estimated 212,000 of those beneficiaries are from el salvador (78 fed.


reg.
32418 (may 30, 2013)),  while 64,000 are from honduras (78 fed.


reg.
20123 (apr.


3, 2013)), and 58,000 are from haiti (79 fed.
reg.


11808, march 3, 2014)).
there are approximately 3,000 tps recipients from nicaragua (78 fed.


reg.
20128 (apr.


3, 2013)) and 2,600 from syria (78 fed.
reg.


36223 (jun.
17, 2013)).


the numbers from sudan  (78 fed.
reg.


1872 (jan.
9, 2013)), south sudan (78 fed.


reg.
1866 (jan.


9, 2013)), and somalia (78 fed.
reg.


65690 (nov.
1, 2013)) are all under 500.


17  78 fed.
reg.


36223 (jun.
17, 2013).


26  journal on migration and human securityfrom persecution by us asylum law, and that most salvadorans were coming to the united  states for economic rather than political reasons (aclu 1984, 11).
those lobbying for  evd for salvadorans charged that the decision not to grant evd was politically motivated.


they alleged that the true reason for the united states withholding of evd was that the  reagan administration generally supported the right-leaning salvadoran government (perl  1983).
partly in hopes of remedying these concerns, in july 1987, congressman romano mazzoli  (d-ky) introduced the temporary safe haven act of 1987,18which was later re-introduced  the following year as the temporary safe haven act of 1988.


19 the purpose of the bill, as  outlined in the 1988 house judiciary committee report recommending its passage, was to  replace the practice known as extended voluntary departure, under which aliens from  countries experiencing turmoil are allowed to remain temporarily, with a more formal and  orderly mechanism for the selection, processing and registration of such individuals.
20  the report noted that while the committee was convinced of the need to provide temporary  protection or safe haven status to individuals who were fleeing danger but would not  meet the definition of a refugee, it was concerned about glaring deficiencies in the evd  program.


21 these included the fact that: (1) the immigration and naturalization service  (ins) did not maintain figures on the number of persons granted evd; (2) the ins could  not effectuate the removal of those whose evd status was terminated because it did not  track their location; (3) the conditions under which a safe haven was granted, extended,  or terminated by the ins did not appear in any regulation, and were only conveyed to  congress and the public via press releases; and (4) there was nothing in the administrative  evd grants to prohibit terrorists, drug traffickers, intelligence agents, and even nazis  from being eligible for evd.
the temporary safe haven act of 1988 called for the creation of a new authorization to  remain temporarily (art) status, which the attorney general could bestow upon noncitizens  from  designated  countries.


22 a  country  could  be  designated  when  the  attorney  general  determined that the foreign state was unable to accept the return of its nationals because  of  an  ongoing  armed  conflict,  a  natural  disaster,  or  other  extraordinary  or  temporary  conditions.
23 individuals granted art would be protected against deportation and have the  ability to apply for work authorization, but they would not be eligible for public benefits.


24  while  the  bill  ultimately  failed  to  pass  during  the  100th  congress,  its  text  formed  the  backbone of the new provision authorizing tps in the immigration act of 1990.
during the 101st congress (1989-1990), bills were introduced in the house to stay the  deportations and allow work authorization for several discrete groups of foreign nationals,   20  h.


r.
rep.


no.
100-627, at 4 (1988).


18  h.
r.


4379, 100th cong.
(1987).


19  h.
r.


2922, 100th cong.
(1988).


21  h.
r.


rep.
no.


100-627, at 5 (1988).
22  h.


r.
2922, 100th cong.


(1988).
23  ibid.


24  ibid.
27  temporary protected status after 25 yearsincluding salvadorans and nicaraguans,25 lebanese,26 and chinese nationals.


27 these bills  also called for the creation of a new temporary protected status, which would include  temporary work authorization and protection against deportation for nationals of designated  countries.
28 the concept of tps was eventually incorporated into the houses version of  the larger immigration act of 1990, which called for the creation of a new tps status and  the designation of four countries for three-year tps grants: el salvador, lebanon, liberia,  and kuwait.


29 the companion bill in the senate contained no such provision.
30 the final  version of the act signed into law on november 29, 1990 authorized the creation of tps  but designated only el salvador, and only for 18 months.


31  absent from almost all of the congressional debates surrounding the creation of tps was  any reference to how to treat tps recipients when tps status was perpetually extended.
the house-senate conference report on the final immigration act of 1990 contains no  mention of the subject.


32 following the passage of the immigration act of 1990, however,  it soon became clear that the lack of legal mechanisms resolving the immigration status  of those granted long-term tps posed a serious problem.
writing on the new tps program  in 1995, bill frelick and barbara kohnen noted the scope of the problem and proposed a  solution:  what  happens  when  the ag  [attorney  general]  extends tps  year  after  year  rather  than  terminating  the  policy?


recipients  of  tps  begin  to  build  their  lives  outside  their  country  while  still  unsure  whether  the  ins  will  eventually  retract  temporary  protection.
if the ins plans to continue extending tps, then it should be recognized  that dangerous conditions in the home country have not been of a temporary nature  and that tps recipients have built up equities in their respective communities.


at some  point, perhaps after tps has been extended for a period of three years, the ins should  have the flexibility to adjust their status.
(frelick and kohnen 1995, 357)  four years later, at a house subcommittee hearing on extending tps status to nicaraguans  and  hondurans,  congresswoman  sheila  jackson  lee  called  on  congress  to  create  an  alternative method for encouraging tps recipients to return home after tps expires.


33  nevertheless,  neither  an  adjustment  mechanism  for  long-term  tps  beneficiaries  nor  a  repatriation assistance mechanism for individuals whose tps status has been terminated  has ever been put into place.
25  h.


r.
45, 101st cong.


(1989).
26  h.


r.
3267, 101st cong.


(1989).
27  h.


r.
2929, 101st cong.


(1989).
28  h.


r.
3267, 101st cong.


(1989); h.
r.


2929, 101st cong.
(1989); h.


r.
45, 101st cong.


(1989).
29  h.


r.
4300, 101st cong.


(1990).
30  s.


358, 101st cong.
(1990).


31  pub.
l.


no.
101-649 (1990).


32  h.
r.


rep.
no.


101-955 (1990).
33  designations of temporary protected status and prior amnesty programs: hearing before the h.


comm.
on the judiciary, subcomm.


on immigration and claims, 106th cong.
, 1st sess.


(march 4, 1999) (statement  of rep.
sheila jackson lee).


28  journal on migration and human securityproblems with the tps system and why a fix is needed  critics of the tps regime contend that the program is not temporary.
indeed, as the list of  currently designated tps countries demonstrates, tps designations and extensions may  stretch years or even decades.


of the eight designated tps countries, twohonduras and  nicaraguawere first designated on january 5, 1999 (uscis 2014).
to qualify for tps  under the most recent designations, honduran and nicaraguan noncitizens must show that  they  have  been  continuously  residing  in  the  united  states  since  december  30,  1998.


34  thus, by virtue of the programs requirements, any individual from honduras or nicaragua  who holds tps has now been residing in the country for more than 15 years.
el salvador is  similarly situated, having been first designated for tps on march 9, 2001 (uscis 2014).


the  cycle  of  continuous  designations,  re-designations,  and  re-extensions  of tps  status  for certain countries is not inherently at odds with the goal of providing a safe haven  for foreign nationals unable to return to their countries of origin because of humanitarian  emergencies.
after  all,  while  the  immigration  act  of  1990  mandated  that  no  initial  designation of tps could last for longer than 18 months, there is no such strict time limit  on the length of humanitarian crises.


a country may legitimately be unable to ensure the  safe and orderly repatriation of its nationals until many years after the initial humanitarian  crisis that triggered a grant of tps has been resolved.
there are reasons, however, to be wary of the use of tps for long-term grants of immigration  status.


first, the programs legislative history indicates a clear congressional intent for tps  to be used for temporary, short-term designations of status.
second, extended grants of  tps run contrary to the policy goals of fostering integration and full membership within  american society for long-term foreign residents.


lacking many of the benefits that come  with lpr status, long-term tps beneficiaries effectively find themselves locked in legal  limbo as de facto members of american society who are offered less than full membership.
long-term grants of tps status run contrary to congressional   intent  although there is scant evidence in the congressional record indicating that congress  actively  considered  how  tps  beneficiaries  would  be  treated  if  they  were  perpetually  granted tps, there is ample evidence indicating that congress intended tps designations  to be temporary.


first, supporters of evd (and later tps) for salvadorans emphasized  that  salvadoran  nationals  were  not  seeking  permanent  protection  in  the  united  states.
the aclus 1984 publication salvadorans in the united states: the case for extended  voluntary departure noted that all sources agree that the salvadorans are interested in  returning to el salvador as soon as it is safe for them to do so.


these sources include the  unhcr, us officials and salvadoran refugees themselves (aclu 1984, 67).
on the floor of the house, the debate over tps centered almost immediately on concerns  that the program could be used to grant indefinite stays of deportation, and supporters  adamantly  emphasized  the  temporary  nature  of  the  program.


on  october  2,  1990,  congressman  william  mccollum  (r-fl),  introduced  an  amendment  to  the  houses   34  64 fed.
reg.


526 (jan.
5, 1999).


29  temporary protected status after 25 yearsimmigration bill that called for the elimination of provisions in the immigration act of  1990 authorizing the creation of tps.
35 mccollums key concern was that the moakley  provisions, so-named for their insertion into the bill by congressman john joseph moakley  (d-ma), were bad policy, because [t]hey keep lots of illegals here indiscriminately for  extended  periods  of  time.


36  in  response,  supporters  of tps  emphasized  the  temporary  nature of the program, noting that proponents were not asking that these people be given  permanent resident status or be allowed to live indefinitely in this country, but that  they be spared deportation until war in their land subsides.
37 the mccollum amendment  ultimately failed in the house by a vote of 131-285.


38   even after the defeat of the mccollum amendment, supporters continued to emphasize  the temporary nature of tps.
key backers of tps, including congressman moakley in  the house and senator kennedy in the senate, characterized the program as temporarily  suspending deportation39 and granting a temporary safe haven.


40 speaking about the  program during the senates final vote on the version of the bill agreed to by both chambers  during conference, senator dennis deconcini (d-az) emphasized that the creation of tps  and designation of el salvador for tps protection could actually assist the immigration  and naturalization service (ins) in ultimately removing salvadorans once their tps status  was ended.
he noted that the program facilitated the creation of a registration system  which would provide a means by which the united states can maintain accurate records  of salvadorans in this country .


.
.


(and) facilitate the return of salvadorans when the period  of temporary protection expires.
41  it is also significant that the final version of the bill to emerge from the house-senate  conference process drastically cut back on the length of initial tps designations (and on  the countries designated for such status) in the original house bill.


the version of the bill  that came out of conference provided that the attorney general had the authority to grant  tps for no longer than 18 months and designated only el salvador for the new status.
42  while the conference report emphasized that the language limiting initial tps designations  to 18 months should not be interpreted as preventing the attorney general from extending  el salvadors initial tps grant,43 the mere fact that the initial time frame for the program  was cut in half underscores congressional concerns over long-term tps grants.


long-term  grants  of  tps  status  lock  beneficiaries  into  legal   limbo continuous grants of tps with no mechanism for permanent adjustment lock tps holders  into  quasi-permanent  limbo  status,  whereby  they  are  effectively  treated  as  long-term   36  ibid.
37  136 cong.


rec.
27130 (1990).


35  136 cong.
rec.


27129 (1990).
38  roll no.


402, 136 cong.
rec.


27133 (1990).
39  136 cong.


rec.
35124 (1990).


40  136 cong.
rec.


35610 (1990).
41  136 cong.


rec.
35611(1990).


42  h.
r.


rep.
no.


101-955 (1990) (conf.
rep.


).
43  ibid.


30  journal on migration and human securityresidents in the united states but denied many of the legal protections that the united  states normally grants to such residents.
unlike lprs, for example, tps holders may not  sponsor family members for immigration to the united states.


44 they are also ineligible for  most federal public benefits (silverman, joaquin, and klapel 2010).
perhaps most significantly, the us government has long taken the position that grants of  tps are not considered admissions or paroles for the purposes of adjustment of status  under ina  245(a) (silverman, joaquin, and klapel 2010).


in 2013, however, the us  court of appeals for the sixth circuit rejected this view, holding that the plain language of  the tps statute indicates that tps holders should be treated as admitted or paroled for  the purposes of adjusting status as the immediate relatives of us citizens.
45 nevertheless,  uscis has chosen not to apply this decision to applicants residing outside the jurisdiction  of the 6th circuit (uscis 2013).


thus, outside of the 6th circuit, unless a tps beneficiary  initially entered the united states through a form of lawful admission (for example, entering  with a non-immigrant visa), he or she is ineligible to apply for adjustment of status even if  he or she has a qualified us citizen or permanent resident relative, or us employer, willing  to file a sponsorship petition.
allowing large numbers of noncitizens to remain in the united states indefinitely in quasi- permanent legal status runs contrary to the united states historic commitment to fully  integrating immigrants who have cultivated strong ties with the country and resided in it for  extended periods of time.


since its earliest laws regulating immigration, the united states  has classified all noncitizens as either immigrants or non-immigrants.
immigrants  are those noncitizens who have been granted lawful permanent residence,46 which bestows  heightened protection against deportation and may be renewed indefinitely.


individuals who  hold lpr status can typically apply for us citizenship after five years.
in contrast, non- immigrants are noncitizens who are admitted for such time, and under such conditions  as the attorney general may prescribe.


47 a fundamental characteristic of non-immigrants  is that their stay in the united states is temporary; all non-immigrants must, at the end of  their authorized period of admission, agree to depart.
48 us law does not generally provide  in between status that is short of lawful permanent residence for individuals who plan to  reside in the united states indefinitely.


the  united  states  also  has  a  long  history  of  allowing  groups  of  noncitizens  who  fled  violence or chaos abroad by entering the country in temporary status to adjust to lpr  status.
in 1934, congress passed a law that allowed noncitizens who had entered the united  states prior to july 1, 1933, and who demonstrated that they were in the country as bona  fide political or religious refugee[s] to become lprs.


49 prior to the countrys enactment  of a comprehensive refugee law in 1980, congress frequently passed laws granting lpr  status to individuals who had been initially paroled into the united states following a  war or political uprising (kerwin 2010, 4-5).
for example, in 1958, congress enacted a  law that ultimately enabled an estimated 30,752 hungarians who had been paroled into  44  ina  203(a) 45  flores v.


uscis, 718 f.
3d 548, 552 (6th cir.


2013).
46  ina  201 47  ina  214 48  8 c.


f.
r.


214.
1 49  pub.


l.
no.


73-299, 48 stat.
926 (1934).


31  temporary protected status after 25 yearsthe  country  following  the  1956  hungarian  revolution  to  adjust  status  (ibid.
).


similarly,  the 1966 cuban adjustment act has granted lawful permanent residence to more than one  million cuban parolees (ibid.
).


us law governing the status of asylees and refugees also reflects a concern for integrating  long-term residents.
neither the refugee convention nor the protocol requires countries to  grant permanent legal status to individuals who are deemed refugees under international  law (mcadam 2005, 503).


yet us law allows asylees and refugees to apply for lawful  permanent residence after one year of residing in the united states.
50  each of these legalization laws reflected particular congressional concerns with respect to  particular groups of noncitizens.


but a common theme throughout them is that the united  states  has  granted  lpr  status  to  individuals  based  on  their  integration  into american  society and their contributions to our national future (motomura 2010, 236).
the 1969  ins statistical yearbook exemplified this pattern through its explanation of the rationale  behind the cuban adjustment act:  it is true that in the beginning most cubans hoped and confidently expected that they  would be going home soon.


as the years passed, this hope faded.
their children went  to american schools and adopted the american way of life as their own.


the parents  and breadwinners wanted to earn their own way, and many were qualified to make real  contributions to our society.
but in order to get the jobs that they could splendidly fill,  they often found that they needed to be permanent residents or citizens of the united  states.


as parolees, they could not be either.
(ins 1969, 9)  in the 1982 supreme court case plyler v.


doe,51 justice brennan raised the possibility  that unauthorized immigrant children denied the opportunity to attend public school in the  united states could easily become part of a permanent caste of undocumented residents,  equivalent to an underclass.
52 although a far different group than unauthorized children,  long-term tps beneficiaries nonetheless raise similar public policy concerns.


in particular,  they raise the question of whether it is in the nations best interests to host a large group of  quasi permanent residents who, by virtue of their long residence, have become integrated  into the fabric of us society, yet because of their legal status, cannot fully participate in it.
making them permanent: proposals to place those in the  tps system on the path to permanent status  amending the current refugee definition  one way to solve the legal limbo problem that long-term tps holders face would be for  the united states to amend its definition of a refugee so that individuals fleeing political  violence or an environmental disaster could qualify for asylum status, which provides a  pathway to permanent residence.


though the beneficiaries of tps have long been recognized   50  ina  209(a) 51  457 u.
s.


202 (1982).
52  457 u.


s.
202, 219 (1982)  32  journal on migration and human securityas de facto refugees (frelick and kohnen 1995, 341), they have generally not qualified  for asylum status in the united states because they have been unable to demonstrate that  they meet two of the criteria required for a grant of refugee status under us asylum law:  that they have been persecuted or have a well-founded fear of persecution (the persecution  prong)  and  that  their  well-founded  fear  is  on  account  of  their  race,  religion,  ethnicity,  membership in a particular social group, or political opinion (the nexus prong).


a major problem with proposals to amend us asylum law to encompass situations where  individuals are fleeing generalized political violence or environmental catastrophes is that  us asylum law hews closely to the definition of a refugee put forth in the 1951 refugee  convention and the 1967 protocol.
international organizations, including and most critically  unhcr, have generally taken the position that individuals fleeing generalized political  violence or environmental catastrophes do not meet the convention definition of a refugee  (unhcr 2011, ch.


v, para.
164).


some scholars argue that customary international law  norms have shifted the definition of a refugee and that it may now include those who are  fleeing environmental disasters or political turmoil (worster 2012, 106-07).
this argument,  however, has yet to gain widespread acceptance in the international law community.


complementary protection   an alternate approach would be to create a new form of subsidiary legal status, modeled  after protection in the european union (eu).
since 2004, european union member states  have granted subsidiary protection to individuals who do not qualify for refugee status  but who demonstrate that they cannot return to their countries of origin due to a real risk  of suffering serious harm (fullerton 2011, 108).


eu directives define three specific types  of harm as serious harm: (1) the death penalty or execution; (2) torture or inhuman or  degrading treatment or punishment; and (3) a serious and individual threat to a civilians  life or person by reason of indiscriminate violence in situations of international or internal  armed conflict (european union 2011).
the directives also provide that member states  may adopt more generous criteria for granting subsidiary protection status, which a number  of states have done.


(ecre 2009).
finland and sweden, for example, grant subsidiary  protection to persons who are outside of their countries of origin and who are unable to  return because of environmental disasters (mayer 2011, 383).


lithuania grants the status to  individuals who have fled widespread violence that is not necessarily the result of an armed  conflict (european migration network 2010, 8).
the specific benefits of subsidiary protection vary from country to country, but european  union directives set the minimum level of protection that states must provide.


under these  directives, beneficiaries must receive residence permits that are valid for at least one year,  and are renewable (european union 2011).
individuals who hold subsidiary protection for  five years become eligible to apply for long-term resident status (council of the european  union 2011).


long-term residents receive a status that is somewhat comparable to lawful  permanent residence in the united states.
they may move freely within the eu, they may  renew their residency indefinitely, and they are generally treated on par with eu citizens  for purposes of accessing education, labor markets, and social security (european union  commission 2014).


33  temporary protected status after 25 yearsnot all of those granted subsidiary protection ultimately are able to apply for long-term  resident status because a state may terminate an individuals subsidiary protection status  before the person has held that status for five years.
under the eu directives, states may end  subsidiary protection when the circumstances which led to the granting of the protection  cease to exist or have changed so that protection is no longer required.


(european union  2011, art.
16).


states may also revoke an individuals subsidiary protection status if the  person has committed fraud or a serious crime.
(european union 2011, art.


19).
prior  to  the  issuance  of  the  newest  (2011)  eu  directive  on  subsidiary  protection,  eu  directives treated beneficiaries of subsidiary protection differently than those who had been  granted  refugee  status.


those  with  subsidiary  protection  faced  greater  restrictions  on  their ability to travel, work, access educational opportunities and vocational training, and  receive social welfare and health care benefits (mcadam 2005, 506-14).
one reason for  this distinction was that legislators generally considered subsidiary protection to be less  permanent in nature than refugee status (pobjoy 2010, 221).


after a number of scholars  criticized this protection hierarchy, asserting that it was not justified under international  law, the eu issued a new directive which generally calls for equal treatment for refugees  and those awarded subsidiary protection (european union 2011).
adopting  a  new  legal  regime  that  resembles  subsidiary  protection  could  address  some  of the weaknesses of the tps program.


by providing certain noncitizens who are unable  to return to their home countries with a form of temporary legal status, the united states  would  address  the  immediate  humanitarian  needs  of  individuals  whose  countries  have  suddenly become engulfed in war or devastated by a natural disaster.
by initially providing  only a temporary legal status, the united states would also acknowledge that in certain  circumstances, individuals initially unable to return home because of these circumstances  may become able to do so at a future date.


at the same time, the inclusion of a mechanism  for  granting  permanent  legal  status  to  individuals  who  have  held  temporary  status  for  extended periods of time would address the humanitarian concerns that arise when short- term crises become long-term ones.
subsidiary protection is far from a perfect substitute for the current tps regime, however.


unlike  tps,  eu  law  provides  that  grants  of  subsidiary  protection  must  be  based  on  individualized threats of harm.
recital 26 of the most recent subsidiary protection directive  specifies that [r]isks to which a population of a country or a section of the population is  generally exposed do normally not create in themselves an individual threat which would  qualify as serious harm (european union 2011).


while a recent case from the european  court of justice clarifies that an applicant for subsidiary protection need not demonstrate  the level of individualized targeting that would be required for a grant of refugee status  (allard 2010, 320), the directive assumes that a grant of subsidiary protection will be tied  to an assessment of personal circumstances.
requiring an applicant to make an individualized showing of harm may work well in a  system designed to grant longer-term humanitarian protection, but less well in a system  designed to deal with the immediate migration needs of individuals displaced by sudden  disasters.


53 tps, as a temporary protection mechanism, is designed to grant protection to   53   notably,  a  separate  eu  directive  governs  grants  of  temporary  protection.
under  this  directive,  eu   34  journal on migration and human securityindividuals who face risks to which a population of a country or a section of the population  is generally exposed.


in order to continue to protect individuals covered by tps, it is not  necessary to screen for an individualized threat of harm, as the protection is based on the  general conditions of their country of origin.
moreover, by requiring applicants to make an  individualized showing of harm, the subsidiary protection regime requires individualized  hearings and a fairly lengthy adjudication process in which an applicants credibility and  supporting documentation is assessed.


(wettergren and wikstrom 2013, 569).
a process  like tps, in contrast, generally does not require a lengthy hearing, as individuals may be  approved or denied on the basis of more objective criteria.


given that the goal of tps  is to provide short-term humanitarian relief, there is merit to retaining a process that is  relatively simple, straightforward, and can be implemented fairly quickly.
adjustment of status  another  approach  to  resolving  the  extended  tps  dilemma  would  be  to  amend  current  immigration law to provide a pathway to permanent residence for tps holders.


the most  straightforward  way  to  accomplish  this  would  be  for  congress  to  pass  a  new  law  that  enables some class of tps beneficiaries (for example, those who have held tps status for  a certain number of years) to apply for lawful permanent residence.
there is some precedent behind such a law.


in 1987, congress authorized granting temporary  legal status to any noncitizen granted evd during the five-year period ending november  1, 1987, thereby placing them on the path to gaining lawful permanent residence through  the legalization provisions of the immigration reform and control act of 1986 (irca).
54   similarly, the 1997 nicaraguan adjustment and central american relief act (nacara)  allowed salvadoran nationals who had entered the united states on or before september  19,  1990,  and  either  registered  for  benefits  through  the  american  baptist  churches  v.


thornburgh  (abc)  class  settlement,  or  applied  for tps  by  october  31,  1991,  to  apply  for special rule cancellation of removal, a process through which they could be granted  permanent residence.
55    there are several obstacles to establishing an adjustment of status program specifically  for long-term tps holders.


the congressional debate surrounding the 1990 immigration  act indicates that many members of congress opposed this idea.
the act itself prohibits  congress  from  enacting  an  adjustment  program  for tps  holders  unless  the  program  is  approved by a three-fifths supermajority of the senate.


56 some scholars have pointed out,  however, that members of the 101st congress may have anticipated that long-term tps  holders would be able to take advantage of other adjustment of status mechanisms in us  immigration law at that time, such as suspension of deportation, that are no longer available  under current law (martin, schoenholtz, and waller meyers 1997, 577-78).
thus, a key   countries may grant temporary legal status for up to one year to third-country nationals in instances where  there has been a mass influx of displaced persons who cannot return to their country of origin (eu directive  2001/55/ec).


like tps in the united states, temporary protection does not convey any form of permanent  legal status, nor does it place beneficiaries on a path to obtaining permanent legal status.
54  pub.


l.
no.


100-204 (1987).
55  pub.


l.
no.


105-100 (1997).
56  ina  244(h)  35  temporary protected status after 25 yearsreason that may have been used to justify not creating an adjustment of status program for  long-term tps holders in 1990 may no longer be as valid today.


congress could also opt to allow tps holders to qualify for a larger legalization program  aimed at changing the status of a broader category of non-lprs.
for example, the language  of the senates 2013 comprehensive immigration reform bill (s.


744) makes clear that  tps holders would qualify to apply for the bills registered provisional immigrant status,  the first step in a ten-year pathway to lawful permanent residence.
57 allowing tps holders  to take advantage of the senates legalization framework would benefit tps holders who  meet the legalization programs other criteria (for example, being physically present in  the united states as of december 31, 2011).


however, it would not rectify the problem of  how to treat future tps-holders who hold temporary status for extended periods of time.
like stand-alone programs to legalize certain tps holders, it is also unclear how a larger  legalization program that included tps holders could be reconciled with the requirements  of ina  244(h), the three-fifths senate supermajority requirement for legislation permitting  tps holders to adjust status.


a variation on the option of creating a new law authorizing adjustment of status for tps  holders would be for the executive branch to re-characterize tps as a type of admission or  parole (or as a waiver of the grounds of inadmissibility that attach with entry to the united  states without inspection).
this would allow greater numbers of current tps holders who  would  otherwise  qualify  for  existing  family-based  and  employment-based  pathways  to  permanent residence to take advantage of those pathways.


most  tps  beneficiaries  who  initially  entered  the  united  states  without  permission  are  barred from applying for lawful permanent residence from within the united states.
this is  because current law provides that, subject to limited exceptions, noncitizens who entered  the country without being admitted or paroled are ineligible for adjustment of status.


58  instead, in order to gain permanent status, the law requires these individuals to depart the  united states and apply for readmission at a us consulate abroad.
for many noncitizens in  this position, the process of leaving the country after having resided in it as an unauthorized  immigrant triggers bars of inadmissibility of three or ten years.


59 this decade-long wait  dissuades many otherwise-eligible noncitizens from applying for lpr status.
uscis could alter this outcome for tps holders who entered the country unlawfully but  are the immediate relatives (spouse, minor child, or parent) of a us citizen in one of three   57   border  security,  economic  opportunity,  and  immigration  modernization  act.


s.
744.


113th  cong.
(2013).


section 2101(a) of the bill, which spells out the grounds of eligibility and ineligibility for registered  provisional immigrant status, states that a noncitizen lawfully present in the united states in nonimmigrant  status is not eligible to apply for registered provisional immigrant status, other than an alien considered to be  a nonimmigrant solely due to the application of section 244(f)(4) (the portion of the ina dealing with tps  holders).
58  ina  245(a)  59  the three year bar applies to individuals who depart from the country after having resided in it in   unauthorized status for more than six months but less than one year.


the ten year bar applies to individuals  who depart from the country after having accrued one year or more of unauthorized presence.
ina  212(a) (9)(b).


waivers of the three and ten year bars are available, but only to noncitizens who show that if they were  denied readmission, it would cause extreme hardship to us citizen or lawful permanent resident spouse or  parent (ina  212(a)(9)(b)(v)).
36  journal on migration and human securityways.


first, uscis could decide to apply the 6th circuits reasoning in the flores decision  to the entire country.
doing so would treat tps holders who initially entered the country  unlawfully as being eligible to apply for adjustment of status if they otherwise qualified to  do so as the immediate relative of a us citizen.


second, the administration could follow a recommendation set forth in an unpublished  uscis memorandum that was leaked to the public in 2010, in which the writers advised  that uscis could issue new guidance administratively granting tps beneficiaries parole- in-place (vanison, et al.
2010).


parole-in-place, which uscis grants to the family of  members of the military, provides noncitizens with temporary protection against removal  and allows individuals who entered the united states without authorization to be considered  paroled for purposes of adjusting status.
based on having been paroled, a parole-in- place beneficiary may move forward with an application to adjust status as the immediate  relative of  a  us  citizen (stock  2011).


like  applying  the flores  precedent nation-wide,  granting parole-in-place would allow far greater numbers of tps holders to take advantage  of existing channels for gaining lawful permanent residence.
finally, a more incremental move would be for uscis to issue formal guidance clarifying  its position with respect to tps holders who travel abroad and are readmitted.


in a 1991  memorandum, the ins adopted the position that a tps holder who had initially entered  the country without inspection, but who, subsequent to a grant of tps, left the country and  returned with advance parole (e.
g.


, parole approved before departure) would be considered  paroled for purposes of the admitted or paroled requirement for adjustment of status  (virtue 1991).
until recently, however, uscis took the position that tps holders who  traveled abroad with advance parole would still trigger the three and ten year unlawful  presence bars if they had previously resided in the united states unlawfully.


a potential  sea change occurred in 2012, when the board of immigration appeals issued matter of  arrabally.
60 rejecting usciss position that leaving the country pursuant to a grant of  advance parole constituted a departure for purposes of ina  212(a)(9)(b), the board  held that a noncitizen with prior unlawful presence who left and returned pursuant to a  grant of advance parole had not triggered the three and ten year bars and was still eligible  for adjustment.


like applying the flores decision nationwide or granting parole-in-place, uscis could  use  the  arrabally  decision  to  provide  a  path  to  permanent  residence  for  one  particular  group of tps holders: those who are able to apply for legal status by virtue of being the  immediate relative (spouse, minor child, or parent) of a us citizen, but who initially entered  the country unlawfully.
for individuals in such a situation, traveling abroad and re-entering  the country with advance parole could enable them to be considered admitted or paroled  for purposes of adjustment of status.


61 assuming that such a trip would not trigger the  three and ten year bars (as would seem to be the case post-arrabally), these tps holders  would  not  be  barred  from  adjusting,  even  if  they  had  previously  resided  in  the  united  states unlawfully.
however, uscis has yet to issue formal guidance on how it will apply  arrabally to tps holders.


as a result, the potential benefits of the decision for tps holders  remain unclear.
60  matter of arrabally.


25 i.
& n.


dec.
771 (bia 2012).


61  ina  245(a)  37  temporary protected status after 25 yearsmaking  them  temporary:  proposals  to  assist  in  the  repatriation of those who previously had tps  an alternativeor complementarymechanism for amending the current tps regime is  to put in place programmatic mechanisms that assist noncitizens whose tps status has  ended in voluntarily returning to their countries of origin.
early proposals on implementing  a  repatriation  program  focused  on  the  role  that  international  organizationssuch  as  unhcr,  the  international  organization  for  migration  (iom),  and  us  agency  for  international development (us-aid)could play in assisting in the repatriation of those  for whom tps status had ended (frelick and kohnen 1995, 356).


more recent proposals  have suggested providing financial assistance to former tps beneficiaries who agree to  return, or withholding the social security taxes of tps holders and then distributing them  only upon return (martin, schoenholtz, and waller meyers 1997, 575).
given unhcrs and ioms vast experience in the voluntary repatriation of refugees, the  united  states  can  and  should  draw  upon  the  best  practices  of  those  organizations  in  structuring any future repatriation program for former tps beneficiaries.


for example, a  number of scholars have examined unhcrs repatriation initiatives and concluded that  certain factors correlate with successful repatriation programs.
these include the provision  of  comprehensive  information  to  migrants  at  the  outset  about  the  conditions  in  their  countries of origin and the proposed return program (rogge 1994, 29), the extent to which  migrants are allowed to transfer economic self-sufficiency (such as money earned and  goods and tools accumulated in the country of asylum) to their countries of repatriation  (rogge 1994, 35), and the extent to which migrants are provided with the tools (such as,  in rural areas, farming implements, seed, and land) to establish self-sufficiency following  repatriation (rogge 1994, 35).


in addition, scholars have noted that successful repatriation  depends on the rebuilding of key infrastructure developments that may have been damaged  during the political or environmental turmoil that caused people to flee (rogge 1994, 36).
for  its  part,  unhcr,  in  its  handbook  on  voluntary  repatriation  and  international  protection, has adopted many of these best practices into its recommended guidance.


for example, the handbook states that unhcr may promote repatriation by undertaking a  comprehensive information campaign to educate displaced migrants about the conditions  in their home countries (unhcr 1996, part 3.
1).


the agency may also facilitate advance  visits for displaced individuals, to allow them to see first-hand the conditions in their  countries of origin (unhcr 1996, part 4.
2).


following in the footsteps of this practice,  the united states could take measures to educate individuals whose tps is ending on the  conditions in their countries of origin.
it could ease travel restrictions on tps holders, by  allowing tps holders to travel in and out of the united states without having to apply for  advance parole, or by lowering the standard for granting advance parole.


such steps would  increase the likelihood that former tps holders have on-the-ground information about  their countries of origin and would be more likely to agree to return to them when their  tps status ends.
unhcrs handbook on voluntary repatriation also promotes the issuance of recovery or  compensation for movable and immovable property that refugees are unable to take with  them when returning to their countries of origin (unhcr 1996, part 3.


6).
similarly, unhcr  documents take the position that for a voluntary repatriation program to be successful,   38  journal on migration and human securitythere must be rehabilitation of critical infrastructure in the displaced individuals country  of  origin,  such  as  the  rebuilding  of  schools,  clinics,  water  points,  public  facilities,  and  houses (unhcr 2004, part 1.


8).
drawing off these key principles, the united states could  develop a repatriation program for individuals whose tps has ended that provides both  direct  aid  to  the  returning  migrants,  and  development  aid  for  their  countries  of  origin,  factors that help ensure that returnees are able to return in safety and dignity.


drawing  the  line:  dual  proposals  to  allow  some  tps  beneficiaries to legalize, and require others to return the best way to realign the tps program with the congressional intent behind it and with  overarching us policy goals would be for congress to pass a law that enables individuals  who have held tps for extended periods of time to become permanent residents, while  putting in place mechanisms that assist those whose tps status has ended after shorter  periods to return home.
while it is tempting to focus on shorter-term administrative fixes  that the executive branch could implement without congressional involvement, only a full- scale legislative reform will solve the legal limbo problem currently facing the majority  of tps holders.


similarly, only a legislative fix could put in place standardized mechanisms  for dealing with future waves of noncitizens fleeing political violence or environmental  catastrophes.
in addition, crafting a new law that allows some long-term tps holders to adjust status  after they have held tps for a certain length of time would foster the full integration of  noncitizens who have built up significant equities in the united states.


of course, such  a policy will require drawing a line to determine the length of time in tps status that is  required for adjustment of status.
setting this line at ten years, so that individuals who have  held tps status for ten consecutive years are permitted to adjust status, would be internally  consistent with other aspects of us immigration law.


62 it would also constitute a significant  amount of time, during which tps holders are likely to begin to put down roots in the  united states and increasingly view themselves as us residents.
at the same time, the united states should take steps to ensure the repatriation of individuals  who have not held tps for ten years, but whose tps has been ended because conditions in  their country of origin have improved.


only by implementing repatriation for those whose  short-term tps has ended can the united states stay true to the initial intent of the tps  programoffering  a temporary safe haven for individuals fleeing harm.
a successful  repatriation program could include withholding earnings (such as social security taxes) that  would be paid to tps holders upon their repatriation.


it could also include implementing  some of the best practices for repatriation developed by the international community,  such as encouraging tps holders to travel back and forth to their countries of origin when  it begins to become safe to do so.
62   for  example,  under  current  law,  unauthorized  immigrants  seeking  adjustment  of  status  in  removal  proceedings  in  the  form  of  cancellation  of  removal  must  demonstrate  that  they  have  been  present  in  the united states for ten years (ina  240a(b)).


similarly, individuals who depart the united states after  accruing more than one year of unlawful presence in the country are no longer inadmissible after they have  resided outside the country for ten years (ina  212(a)(9)(b)).
39  temporary protected status after 25 yearsundoubtedly, implementing any kind of a repatriation program for individuals whose tps  has been terminated will prove extremely controversial, as will allowing certain long-term  tps holders to adjust status.


yet, for the united states to maintain the integrity of the tps  program, both steps are necessary.
given that the number of individuals seeking a tps safe  haven is likely to only increase in the coming years, fixing the program at this juncture  could not be more critical.


