unlocking human dignity: a plan  to transform the us immigrant  detention system1   migration and refugee services/united states conference of catholic bishops  center for migration studies  executive summary unlocking human dignity: a plan to transform the us immigrant detention  system addresses one of the most troubled features of the us immigration  system and highlights the need for fundamental changes to it.
the report  comes six years since the inception of the obama administrations detention  reform  initiative.


in  the  interim,  the  number  of  immigrant  detainees  per year has risen to more than 400,000, the administration has opened  immense  new  family  detention  centers,  and  the  overwhelming  majority  of persons in the custody of the department of homeland security (dhs)  have remained in prisons, jails and other secure facilities where they are  subject to standards designed for criminal defendants and, in many ways,  treated more harshly than criminals.
the  reports  overarching  recommendation  is  that  the  us  immigrant  detention system be dismantled and replaced with a network of supervised  release, case management, and community support programs, designed to  ensure court appearances.


it recognizes that detention may be necessary  for short periods and in certain cases, but it rejects detention as a central  immigrant management tool, and argues that detention should only be  used as a last resort if less harmful strategies and programsviewed on  a  continuum  beginning with  the  least  restrictive  and  moving to  release  programs with different levels of supervision, monitoring, and support cannot reasonably ensure court appearances or (in rare cases) protect the  public.
it opposes the detention of pregnant and nursing women, bona fide  asylum seekers, the very ill, the disabled, the elderly, and other vulnerable  persons.


it calls for the substantial contraction of detention facilities and  bed space.
as the first step in this process, the report urges congress to commission  a comprehensive study on the benefits, challenges, cost, and time frame  1   the  report  by  migration  and  refugee  services  and  center  for  migration  studies  entitled  unlocking  human dignity: a plan to transform the u.


s.
immigrant detention system, has been reproduced, in part,  by the journal on migration and human security in this article.


the full report is available at: http://www.
usccb.org/about/migration-and-refugee-services/upload/unlocking-human-dignity.


pdf.
2015 by the united states conference of catholic bishops.


jmhs volume 3 number 2 (2015): 159-204for  creating  a  civil  immigration  detention  system.
it  also  proposes  that  the administration create a full menu of court compliance programs, with  varying  degrees  of  supervision,  reporting,  oversight  and  monitoring.


in  order to realize this vision, it offers several additional recommendations.
the obama administration should desist from using detention  as a deterrent to illegal migration and de facto refugee flows.


dhs should close its family detention centers in favor of community- based  supervision  and  support  programs  for  immigrant  families.
the  vast  majority  of  families  would  appear  for  removal  proceedings  with  appropriate orientation, supervision and community support.


the growth  of  an  immense  family  detention  infrastructure  will  not  (as  intended)  deter imperiled persons from seeking refuge in the united states, but  will invariably lead to the return of de facto refugees to their persecutors  in violation of international law.
congress should pass legislation to repeal mandatory detention  in  all  but  the  most  egregious  criminal  and  national  security  cases.


us mandatory detention laws cover lawful permanent residents,  asylum  seekers,  petty  offenders,  and  persons  with  us  families  and  other  enduring ties to the united states.
by definition, they prevent  individualized release determinations based on family ties, employment,  housing,  criminal  history,  and  other  factors.


in  the  overwhelming  majority  of  cases,  immigration  judges  or  judicial  officers  should  be  permitted to consider the full range of equities and release options for  persons in removal proceedings, whether formal court proceedings or  non-court, administrative and summary processes.
private  corporations  should  have  a  more  limited,  regulated  and  modest  role  in  a  shrinking  detention  system.


the  federal  government  has  increasingly  ceded  responsibility  for  detention  to  entities whose loyalties run to their shareholders, not the common good.
by some estimates, for-profit prison corporations administer more than  60 percent of the beds in the us immigrant detention system.


rather  than expanding its reliance on for-profit prison companies, the federal  government  ought  to  decrease  the  use  of  detention,  develop  greater  government expertise, and strengthen oversight of private contractors.
detention  reform  should  include  a  significant  expansion  of  alternative to detention programs (atd).


detention should only be  used sparingly, for brief periods (when necessary), and as a last resort  when less restrictive strategies cannot reasonably ensure appearances  during  the  adjudication  and  removal  process  and  cannot  protect  the  public.
atd  programs  can  offer  effective,  humane  alternatives  to detention.


however, they should not  be used to expand detention  capacity.
like detention, intensive reporting and monitoring programs  can stigmatize and incapacitate persons.


if necessary, atd programs   160  journal on migration and human securityshould  be  treated  as  a  form  of  custody,  which  would  open  them  to  mandatory detainees.
immigration and customs enforcement (ice) should undertake  a comprehensive analysis of its information systems.


the proposed  review  should  identify  the  information  ice  tracks  on  those  who  are  subject  to  its  custody;  how,  when,  and  which  officials  collect,  enter,  and  can  access  this  information;  its  quality  control  procedures;  and  the accessibility of information to congressional oversight committees,  government watchdog agencies, relevant ice officials, and the public.
detained immigrantsthose who do not qualify for release or  atd  programsshould  be  held  in  non-penal  settings  which  reflect the conditions of normal life to the extent feasible.


dhs  should  provide  generous  access  to  international  organizations,  faith- based groups, nongovernmental organizations (ngos) and the press, to  all of its facilities.
immigration  judges  should  adjudicate  removal  cases  now  handled  through  administrative,  informal  and  non-court  processes, and should make release and custody determinations  soon after their detention for all persons in dhs custody.


they  should also regularly revisit custody decisions for detainees.
however,  these  responsibilitiesadded  to  an  immense  yearly  workload  and  a  daunting backlog of more than  440,000 caseswill  require increases  in  funding  and  staffing  by  an  order  of  magnitude.


as  it  stands,  the  immigration court system receives less than two percent of the combined  funding  of  customs  and  border  protection  (cbp)  and  ice.
the  cost  of  right-sizing  the  immigration  court  system  may  well  be  offset  by  reductions  in  dhs  detention  funding  and  diminished  federal  court  expenses from habeas corpus petitions.


unrepresented, indigent persons in removal proceedings should  be  provided  with  legal  representation  at  the  governments  expense.
as numerous studies have revealed, legal counsel is one of  the  most  important  factors,  even  more  important  than  the  strength  of  the  underlying  legal  claim,  in  influencing  asylum  and  other  case  outcomes.


representation  also  increases  court  appearance  rates  and  leads  to  decreased  overall  costs  to  the  government  due  to  reduced  use  of  detention,  more  efficient  court  proceedings,  and  less  frequent  placement of the children of detainees in foster care.
more importantly,  it contributes to the right decisions being made under the law.


migration and refugee services of the us conference of catholic bishops  (mrs/usccb) and the center for migration studies (cms) approach the  detention of immigrants from a pastoral perspective.
each day us catholic  institutions minister to detained immigrants, represent them in removal   161  unlocking human dignityproceedings,  tend  to  the  material  and  spiritual  needs  of  their  families,  and witness the pain of traumatized children and the anguish of divided  families.


because of the detention systems devastating effect on the lives  of millions of persons each year, mrs/usccb and cms strongly support  the transformation of this system and urge the obama administration and  congress to proceed with the proposed reforms with all deliberate haste.
i.


vision for reform the us immigrant detention system grew more than five-fold between 1994 and 2013.
during these years, the average daily detained population rose from 6,785 to 34,260 (figure  1).


the number of persons detained annually increased from roughly 85,000 persons in  1995 to 440,557 in 2013 (kerwin 1996, 1; simansky 2014, 6).
since the beginning of the  obama administrations detention reform initiative in 2009, annual detention numbers have  reached record levels (figure 2).


more persons pass through the us immigrant detention  system each year than through federal bureau of prisons (bop) facilities (meissner et al.
2013, 131).


figure 1.
average daily population of detainees fy 1994- 2013  source: siskin 2004; siskin 2012; dhs-oig 2014; email correspondence with alison siskin from  the congressional research service.


this  growth  has  occurred in  what  may  be  the  most  troubled  institution in  the  vast  us  immigration  enforcement  system.
the  numbers  only  hint  at  the  toll  that  this  system   162  journal on migration and human securityexacts in despair, fractured families, human rights violations, abandoned legal claims, and  diminished national prestige.


figure 2.
annual detention population fy 2001-2013  source: immigration and naturalization service (ins).


various years.
yearbook of immigration  statistics.


washington dc: ins.
http://www.


dhs.gov/archives; dhs.
various years.


yearbook of  immigration statistics.
washington, dc: dhs, office of immigration statistics.


http://www.
dhs.


gov/yearbook-immigration-statistics; simansky 2014.
the us department of homeland security (dhs) lacks the authority to imprison criminals  and does not hold anybody awaiting trial or serving a criminal sentence.


congress and  dhs use the anodyne language of processing and detention to describe this system.
yet each year dhss immigration and customs enforcement agency (ice) holds hundreds  of  thousands  of  noncitizens  and  the  occasional  us  citizen  (carcamo  2014),  many  for  extended periods, in prisons, jails, and other secure facilities where their lives are governed  by standards designed for criminal defendants.


detention brands immigrants as criminals  in the publics eye and contributes to the sense that they deserve to be treated as such.
in many respects, immigrant detainees are treated less favorably than criminal defendants.


us  mandatory  detention  laws  cover  broad  categories  of  noncitizens,  including  lawful  permanent  residents  (lprs),  asylum  seekers,  petty  offenders,  and  persons  with  us  families and other strong and longstanding ties to the united states.
sixty percent of the  unauthorized have resided in the united states for 10 years or more and 17 percent for  at least 20 years (warren and kerwin 2015, 86-7, 99).


moreover, dhs has interpreted  the laws to preclude the release of mandatory detainees, even release coupled with the  most intensive restrictions and monitoring.
by way of contrast, most criminal defendants   163  unlocking human dignityreceive custody hearings by judicial officers shortly after their apprehension and they can  be released subject to conditions that will reasonably ensure their court appearance and  protect the public.


detention is treated as a pillar of the us immigration enforcement system akin to border  control or removal, but in fact it is a means to an end that would be far better served by  a more humane, less costly system.
its purpose is to ensure that noncitizens in removal  proceedings appear for their hearings and, if they are removable and lack legal relief, that  their removal can be effected.


detention is also justified as a tool to protect others, although  this consideration is more relevant to the criminal justice system.
in fact, there are tested,  effective, and humane ways to accomplish these goals short of detention.


supervised or  conditional release programs have long been a mainstay of the criminal justice system, but  have only recently begun to gain traction in the immigration context.
moreover, detention  makes it far less likely that indigent and low-income immigrants will be able to secure legal  counsel and, thus, to present their claims for relief and protection.


in 2009, dhs-ice discontinued the detention of immigrant families at the t.
don hutto  residential facility, a privately owned, 512-bed, former medium security prison in taylor,  texas, that had been the subject of law suits and scathing human rights reports (bernstein  2009).


it also suspended plans for three new family detention centers, leaving only 38  families with children in ice facilities (schriro 2009, 11).
however, in response to the  dramatic increase in the migration of parents and minor children from honduras, guatemala  and el salvador in fiscal year (fy) 2014, the obama administration has opened new family  detention facilities which will have a combined capacity of roughly 3,700 beds (cowan  and edwards 2014; wilder 2014; dhs-ice 2014d).


conditions at detention facilities are  particularly ill-suited and harmful to children.
2 many argue that they violate the minimum  standards  for  the  detention  and  treatment  of  children  set  forth  in  the  settlement  of  the  flores  v.


meese  litigation  in  1997.
detention  can  cause  children  anxiety,  depression,  sleep difficulties, regression in academic achievement and language development, social  withdrawal, and post-traumatic stress (fazel, karunakara, and newnham 2014).


it also  violates  the  internationally-recognized  best  interests  of  the  child  standard.
for  these  reasons, immigrant families should not be detained.


immigrant detention may be necessary for short periods in limited circumstances, including  during screening and processing of noncitizens by immigration officials and, in rare cases,  to hold persons who are not likely to appear for their removal hearings or who will pose a  danger even if they are subject to the most restrictive forms of supervised release.
3 some  past studies have shown that persons released and advised to appear for court hearings often in the distant future and at distant localesfail to appear at acceptable rates.


this is  not surprising since they may not understand the instructions they have been given or the  requirement to appear.
that said, our proposed system would ensure high court appearance  rates by providing a continuum of supervised release/community support programs based  2   when a us conference of catholic bishops (usccb) delegation toured the artesia facility on july 23,  2014, for example, it learned that detained mothers had to keep their children with them at all times, including  during interviews to determine if they could pursue political asylum claims.


in addition, it found that the  dining hall area was the only indoor area suitable for meals, legal meetings and religious activities.
3   detention should only be used as a last resort in the rare cases when alternative programs cannot realistically  ensure appearances or protect the public.


164  journal on migration and human securityon risk of flight and danger.
similar programs have been shown to be highly successful at  ensuring high appearance rates.


detention should not be used as a central immigration management tool.
instead, the  status quo should be replaced by a system characterized by timely, individualized custody  hearings by immigration judges or judicial officers of all persons in dhs custody, resulting  in supervised release with case management and community-based support services in a  high percentage of cases.


any restrictions or conditions placed on released noncitizens  should be the least restrictive, non-punitive means necessary to promote court appearances.
in  fact,  no  other  us  legal  system  permits  a  deprivation  of  liberty  without  review  and  oversight by an independent judiciary.


since 2009, the obama administration has worked to reform the us detention system,  achieving several incremental successes.
however, in the interim, the number of detainees  annually has increased (figure 2).


moreover, the overwhelming majority of detainees will  still be held in prisons, jails and prison-like facilities at the end of the reform initiative.
4 in  short, deeper reforms are needed.


persons who, with sufficient supervision and community  support,  would  appear  for  their  immigration  proceedings,  should  not  be  detained.
the  current system, which is based on a correctional, criminal, and national security paradigm,  should be replaced by one that reflects dhs-ices legal authorities and the nature of those  in its custody.


the number of immigrant detention facilities should be substantially contracted, the role  of for-profit prisons in administering this system should be reduced, and detention should  be  used  only  as  a  last resort when  less  harmful strategies and  programsviewed on  a  continuum, beginning with the least restrictive (release on recognizance) and moving to  release programs with rising levels of supervision, monitoring and supportare exhausted.
the current legal and physical detention infrastructure should be largely dismantled.


detention should not be used to deter illegal immigration or refugee-like flows, or as a  means to evade us sovereign responsibilities to protect those who have fled persecution.
its use should turn exclusively on an individualized determination of flight risk and danger.


mandatory detention should be eliminated in virtually all cases, with the exception of a  category of cases involving potential danger to the public and threats to national security.
as it stands, mandatory detention has served as a poor proxy for dangerousness and flight  risk and, thus, has impeded effective management of the detention system (dhs-oig 2006,  5-6).


the release of persons awaiting criminal trial has long been a necessary and effective  feature of federal, state, and local criminal justice systems.
while not fully apposite, the  success  of  supervised  release  programs  in  the  criminal  justice  system  provides  strong  evidence that this approach could ensure high appearance rates in removal proceedings.


pregnant  and  nursing  women,  asylum  seekers  (particularly  those  determined  to  have  a  credible fear of persecution), the very ill, the disabled, the elderly, immigrant families,  and other vulnerable persons should not be detained.
detainees should be held in non- penal settings which approximate the conditions of normal life.


among other minimum   4   moreover, for-profit prison corporations apply substantial political pressure to create what they view as  business opportunities in the form of draconian enforcement policies and greater use of detention.
165  unlocking human dignitystandards, detainees should be afforded the opportunity to practice their faith, including  generous  access  to  religious  services,  activities  and  personnel.


in  addition,  decision  to  detain should be regularly revisited and independently reviewed by an immigration judge  or judicial officer.
dont take my sweater the family detention facility in artesia, new mexico, now closed, held children who  averaged six and one-half years old.


artesia is a desert-like arid climate and landscape,  with temperatures reaching 100 fahrenheit or more during the summer.
at one point,  the  facility  contained  dozens  of  familiesyoung  mothers  with  little  children.


one  little girl, around two years old, always wore a bright pink and black sweater, which  was, as her mother told it, her favorite possession.
the little girl feared that if she  took off the sweater, it would be taken away.


the image of this little girl, overheated  because she wore her favorite possession and feared its loss, shows the vulnerability  of little children in a restrictive setting and how unsuited children are to live in prison- like facilities.
to transform the us immigrant detention system will require the large-scale expansion  of alternative to detention (atd) programs.


atd programs represent a form of custody  and should be available to those subject to mandatory detention.
highly restrictive atd  programs with electronic monitoring devices and regular reporting and visitation, while  preferable to confinement in a prison-like setting, can stigmatize and humiliate immigrants  and should be used sparingly.


community-based, case management services for persons in  removal proceedings can ensure court appearances at high rates and at lower financial and  human cost.
funding for the us immigration court system should increase by an order of magnitude.


this would diminish case backlogs which now average more than 18 months (trac 2015),  allow for the timely adjudication of cases, and obviate the need for costly and prolonged  detention.
prolonged detention should be statutorily prohibited, whether for persons whose  removal proceedings are pending or for those who have received an order of removal.


as  it stands, the immigration court system receives only one-sixtieth of the combined funding  of dhss two immigration enforcement agencies, customs and border protection (cbp),  and ice (doj 2014; dhs 2014a).
immigration judges or judicial officers should be vested with the authority to make custody  decisions soon after detention for every person facing removal, including those subject  to expedited, summary, administrative, and non-court removals.


in addition, all persons  facing removal should be afforded a hearing before an immigration judge.
finally,  detention  makes  it  far  more  difficult  for  indigent  and  low-income  immigrants  to secure counsel and, as a result, to present their legal claims for relief and protection,  including  asylum.


given  its  responsibility  to  afford  due  process  and  its  strong  interest  in  fully  informed  and  efficient  decision-making,  the  us  government  should  fund  legal  counsel for indigent persons in removal proceedings, particularly detainees.
166  journal on migration and human securityii.


analogous unhcr and aba standards on detention standards  and  guidelines  released  by  the  american  bar  association  (aba)  and  the  united  nations  high  commissioner  for  refugees  (unhcr)  over  the  last  three  years  offer substantial support for a transformed immigrant detention system.
the aba civil  immigration detention standards were intended to serve as a blueprint and guide to the  dhs-ice detention reform initiative, while the unhcr standards primarily cover asylum  seekers and were intended for a global audience.


us immigration law allows for the release of non-mandatory detainees if they would not  pose a danger to property or persons and are likely to appear for proceedings.
5 the aba  immigrant detention standards posit a more limited purpose for detention: to ensure court  appearances and effect removal (aba 2012, introduction).


6 moreover, the aba standards  adopt a guiding principle at odds with broad us mandatory detention rules; that is, that [a] ny restrictions or conditions placed on noncitizensresidents or othersto ensure their  appearance in immigrant court or their actual removal should be the least restrictive, non- punitive means necessary to further these goals, and decisions to continue to detain should  be regularly revisited (ibid.
).


this principle assumes particular importance when applied  to children.
the unhcr has appropriately made an end to child detention the first goal  of its global strategy  to end the detention of asylum seekers and refugees (uhncr  2014, 17).


7  the aba envisions a continuum of atd programs (ibid.
, note 1).


if after considering all  the alternatives, detention is deemed necessary to ensure court appearances in an individual  case, then the aba would place the detainee in a facility that might be closely analogized  to secure nursing homes, residential treatment facilities, domestic violence shelters, or in  in-patient psychiatric treatment facilities that seek to normalize living conditions  to  the greatest extent possible (ibid.
, 3).


the aba sets forth detailed standards to guide many aspects of custodial life.
for example,  the aba provides a series of standards on access to religious services.


8 overall, the aba  standards argue for the need to replace the status quo system of (mostly) prisons and jails  governed by standards designed for criminal pre-trial defendants, with a more humane,   5   8 cfr 236.
19 (c)(8); 8 cfr 3.


19(h)(3).
6   the aba standards on criminal pre-trial release add community, victim and witness protection to the criteria  governing  release  determinations.


like  its  civil  detention  standards,  the abas  pretrial  release  standards  provide  that  release  conditions  be  the  least  restrictive  necessary  to  reasonably  ensure  a  defendants  attendance at court proceedings and protect the community, victims, witnesses or any other person (aba  2007, 1).
7   unhcrs five sub-goals or objectives for ending child detention are to develop legal frameworks to  ensure  children  are  not  detained,  except  in  exceptional  circumstances,  as  a  measure  of  last  resort,  for  a  legitimate purpose and for the shortest possible period; that the best interests of the child standard governs  all decisions related to children; that alternative reception/care arrangements (including for families) be  available and appropriate; that child sensitive screening and referral procedures lead to timely referral  to  relevant  child  protection  institutions  or  organisations  and  to  the  receipt  of  necessary  services  and  assistance; and, that the immediate release of children from detention and their placement in other forms  of appropriate accommodation is coordinated amongst national agencies and, as appropriate, with unhcr  (ibid.


).
8    unfortunately,  the abas  detention  standards  on  access  to  health  care  incorporate  by  reference aba  standards on the treatment of prisoners that provide for access to abortion services.


167  unlocking human dignitycost-effective system that is appropriate for noncitizens in civil removal proceedings.
a visit to karnes, texas the  delegation,  led  by  the  archbishop  of  san antonio,  entered  the  new  facility,  a  model for dhs.


nothing seemed amiss and the facilities were clean and spacious.
as the archbishop said mass under a tent in the compound, the fear and trepidation  on the faces of the mothers were clear.


one by one, they prayed aloud for deliverance  from the facility and for reunification with their families.
many had been traumatized  from their journey north from central america.


one confessed that her husband had  been murdered by gang members and that they had threatened her and her children  as well.
after the mass, many asked for assistance with their asylum claims, as they  had no lawyers to assist them and little information from enforcement officials about  the process.


please help us, please pray for us, they asked.
the delegation walked out  deflated and frustrated, awake to the damage caused by the facility, despite its outward  appearance.


the  unhcr  detention  guidelines  place  detention  in  the  context  of  international  law,  particularly the 1967 united nations protocol relating to the status of refugees and the  1951 united nations convention relating to the status of refugees which provide that  states should not expel or return a refugee to territories where his life or freedom would  be  threatened  on  account  of  his  race,  religion,  nationality,  membership  of  a  particular  social group or political opinion.
the catholic church has consistently supported and  urged  all  states  to  ratify  and  abide  by  the  refugee  convention.


the  united  states  has  signed onto the 1967 protocol and the international covenant on civil and political rights.
yet us interdiction, interception and detention policies prevent migrants from reaching  us territorial boundaries and securing protection (flynn 2014).


these policies have also  inspired several states to externalize their immigration enforcement policies and, thus, to  evade their responsibilities to protect refugees and others in need (ibid.
).


the  unhcr  guidelines  affirm  that  the  right  to  seek  asylum  must  be  respected  and  asylum seekers must not be penalized for illegal entry or stay.
yet the us detention system  leads asylum seekers to abandon their claims, which would be reason enough to reform  the system.


because asylum seekers enjoy the rights to liberty, human security, and free  movement,  the  unhcr  standards  provide  that  detention  should  be  a  measure  of  last  resort, with liberty being the default position (unhcr 2012, 14).
like the aba standards, the unhcr guidelines provide that detention must be based on  an individualized assessment, and must be necessary, reasonable, and proportionate to a  legitimate purpose (ibid.


,  2).
the unhcr believes that detention may be permissible  for short periods to carry out initial identity and security checks, and can be exceptionally  resorted to for three legitimate purposes: to protect the public order (which allows the  detention  of  those  likely  to  abscond  or  who  otherwise  refuse  to  cooperate  with  the  authorities); to protect public health; and to protect national security (ibid.


,  24, 28-30).
moreover, the guidelines state that decisions to detain or extend detention must be subject  to procedural safeguards; detention conditions must be humane and dignified; the special   168  journal on migration and human securityneeds and circumstances of asylum seekers should be taken into account; and detention  should be subject to independent monitoring and inspection by international and regional  bodies and nongovernmental organizations (ngos).


because detention decisions require an individualized assessment, the unhcr guidelines  consider mandatory or automatic detention to be arbitrary and impermissible (ibid.
,   18-20).


moreover, they provide that detention must be in accordance with and authorized  by law and the law must offer sufficient protections against arbitrary detention, which  includes  indefinite  detention.
the  guidelines  prohibit  detention  to  deter  future  asylum  seekers, or to dissuade those who have commenced their claims from pursuing them, or  for punitive purposes (ibid.


,  32).
unhcr would require that atd programsfrom reporting requirements to structured  community supervision and/or case management programmesbe considered part of an  overall assessment of the necessity, reasonableness and proportionality of detention (ibid.


,   35).
its guidelines provide that detention should be used only as a last resort and when a  less invasive or coercive means cannot accomplish the same ends (ibid.


).
9 in addition,  atds  that  restrict  liberty  should  be  subject  to  human  rights  standards  and  periodic  review in individual cases by an independent body (ibid.


,  37).
finally, unhcr provides  that atds should not be used as alternative forms of detention or be applied to persons  who would otherwise be released (ibid.


,  38).
iii.


characteristics  of  the  immigrant  detention  system and the need for reform dhs-ice does not have the authority to incarcerate immigrants.
instead, its authority is  limited to holding noncitizens during the adjudication and removal process.


yet the us  detention system has long operated like a prison system, but without the benefit of civil  rights case law or the same levels of proficiency and professionalism as most correctional  systems (schriro 2010, 1442-43, 1449).
the systems physical infrastructure consists of  a sprawling hodgepodge of state and local jails, for-profit prisons, bop prisons, border  patrol holding cells, and prison-like service processing centers administered by ice.


it  holds noncitizensmore than three-quarters of whom are subject to mandatory detention  (gao 2014, 28)in a diverse mix of roughly 250 facilities which includes:        103 facilities owned by states, localities and private entities which held roughly one-third of ice detainees between 2010 and 2012 (via intergovernmental service agreements (igsas)), and which also held criminal inmates.
nine state, local and private (contract) facilities, holding 22 percent of detainees,  which housed only immigrant detainees.


seven  contract  facilities,  holding  19  percent  of  immigrant  detainees,  which  are owned and operated by for-profit prison agencies.
125 state, local and private facilities, holding 14 percent of ice detainees pursuant to igsas with the us marshals service.


10  9   similarly, amnesty international has argued that immigrant detention should only be used as a measure  of last resort; it must be justified in each individual case and be subject to judicial review (ai 2009, 11).
10   the us marshals service holds federal prisoners prior to their conviction or acquittal.


169  unlocking human dignity  six service processing centers, containing 12 percent of ice detainees that are owned by ice and operated by ice employees and contractors.
residential  family  detention  centers  which  will  ultimately  house  roughly  3,700 persons (including children) in dilley, texas; karnes, texas; and berks county, pennsylvania (cowan and edwards 2014; wilder 2014; dhs-ice 2014d).


11  since 2009, the obama administration has worked to reform the us immigrant detention  system  with  the  goal  of  creating  a  system  that  reflects  its  legal  authority,  which  is  to  ensure appearances during the civil removal process.
its administrative reforms evidence a  meaningful and good-faith response to longstanding problems in the immigrant detention  system  (schriro  2010,  1442;  dhs-ice  2014c).


among  other  reforms,  ice  changed  its  policy on detention for asylum seekers to generally release arriving noncitizens who  demonstrate a credible fear of return to their home countries and who seek political asylum  in the united states (dhs-ice 2009).
under the prior policy, arriving asylum seekers who  demonstrated a credible fear of return had to apply in writing for parole and would only  be  granted  parole  if  they  could  demonstrate  significant  community  ties.


12  ice  has  also  eliminated roughly 100 contracts with states and localities, and has reduced its detention  bed space in contract facilities accordingly.
there are solutions: alternatives to detention in  january,  2014,  the  us  conference  of  catholic  bishops  (usccb),  along  with  its catholic charities partners, launched a small pilot program with dhs to accept  detainees and help them in the community.


though small, the pilot worked to provide  legal and community-based case management to released detainees and integration  into  the  community  for  those  provided  immigration  relief.
usccb  will  now  take  families into the program in the hope of demonstrating the effectiveness of the model  and expanding it.


ice has also developed ambitious new standards related to conditions of confinement, its  performance based national detention standards (pbnds), that address historical and  recurrent  problems  in  the  us  detention  system  (dhs-ice  2013b).
the  standards  have  undergone several iterations based on consultation with diverse stakeholders, including  the us conference of catholic bishops (usccb) and numerous catholic entities.


they  cover medical and mental health services; access to legal information, support and counsel;  transfers away from family and support services; access to religious services; reporting and  responding to grievances and complaints; and visitation practices.
ice has likewise built  a civil detention facility designed to showcase and reflect these standards (semple and  eaton 2012), and it has exercised greater oversight of detention facilities.


it has also issued  directives on reporting and notification of detainee deaths; prevention of and intervention   11   the artesia family residential center opened at the federal law enforcement training center in new  mexico in june 2014.
in november 2014, ice suspended intake to this facility.


ice has contracted with the  correctional corporation of america (cca) to operate a new 2,400 bed facility for families in dilley, texas.
it has converted its existing facility in karnes, texas into a family detention facility and plans to increase  its size.


it also plans to increase the size of its family detention center in berks county, pennsylvania.
12   the term parole does not carry criminal connotations under us immigration law.


it refers to release into  the united states for a temporary period and does not, in itself, lead to permanent status.
170  journal on migration and human securityin cases of sexual abuse and assault; facilitation of parental rights for those in custody;  and central review and oversight of detainee segregation decisions (dhs-ice 2014c).


a linchpin of its administrative reform has been the development of a risk classification  assessment (rca) instrument designed to guide custody and detainee placement decisions.
in fy 2013, only nine percent of the 168,087 persons processed through the rca program  were released from custody outright or placed in an atd program (gao 2014, 28).


while  the rca generally seeks to assess dangerousness, flight risk and vulnerability (gao 2014,  8), ice has not publicized the actual (evolving) criteria used to make automated custody  and placement decisions.
thus, it remains difficult to assess whether this new enforcement  tool will meaningfully alter custody rates and placement patterns, or will instead automatize  continued overreliance on detention.


at the outset of the dhs-ice detention reform initiatives, the founding director of ices  office of detention policy and planning wrote that while immigrant detention is unlike  federal detention as a matter of law, both criminal convicts and civil detainees were:   held in secure facilities with hardened perimeters in remote locations, generally at  considerable  distances  from  counsel  and/or  their  communities.
with  but  a  few  exceptions, the facilities that ice uses to detain aliens were originally built as jails and  prisons to confine pre-trial and sentenced felons (citations omitted).


they continue  to operate true to their original design.
their layout, construction, staffing plans, and  population  management  strategies  are  largely  based  upon  traditional  correctional  principles of command and control.


(schriro 2010, 1442)    the same holds true today.
six years into ices reform initiative, the great majority of ice  detainees continue to be held in jails, prisons and prison-like facilities, subject to standards  based  on american  correctional association  (aca)  standards  for  criminal  defendants  awaiting the disposition of their cases.


moreover, this will remain the case for the great  majority of detainees even after ices reform initiative has been fully implemented (hrf  2011, 18).
several problems have long plagued this system, and require far deeper reforms  than are currently being contemplated.


iv.
the misuse of detention, abusive conditions and the persistent mistreatment of vulnerable populations the aba has called for better treatment not just of immigrant detainees, but of criminal  defendants awaiting trial as well.


because the [d]eprivation of liberty pending trial is harsh  and oppressive, subjects defendants to economic and psychological hardship, interferes  with  their  ability  to  defend  themselves,  and,  in  many  instances,  deprives  their  families  of support, the aba supports a presumption of release of criminal defendants pending  adjudication of charges (aba 2007, 1).
for the same reasons, immigrant detention should  be used sparingly and as a last option.


the us detention system deprives persons of liberty,  divides  families,  inhibits  integration,  and  prevents  participation  in  the  broader  society.
according  to  the  founding  director  of  ices  office  of  detention  policy  and  planning,  detained immigrants often receive worse treatment and fewer protections than criminals  serving prison sentences (schriro 2010, 1445).


171  unlocking human dignityin a 2000 report titled the needless detention of immigrants in the united states: why  are we locking up asylum-seekers, children, stateless persons, long-term permanent  residents, and petty offenders?
, the catholic legal immigration network, inc.


(clinic)  outlined the extensive literature on the us detention system (clinic 2000b).
13 by that  point, a steady stream of reports by government oversight agencies, ngos, and assorted  experts had detailed severe problems in the treatment of asylum seekers, torture survivors,  the  mentally  ill,  women,  children,  families,  indefinitely  detained  persons,  mandatory  detainees, illegally-detained us citizens, and particular ethnic and national groups.


other  reports  had  documented  problems  in  different  types  of  detention  facilities.
still  others  described systemic problems related to conditions of confinement, including lack of access  to counsel, restrictions on visitation, limited pastoral care, poor health services, the misuse  of segregation, physical and emotional abuse, and deaths in custody (ibid.


).
a later expos on the us immigrant detention system described a phenomenon familiar to  pastoral workers, legal counsel, and other visitors to detention centers: i.


e.
, the depression  and lethargy of many detainees who simply try to sleep through the day (dow 2004, 95).


as  the  leadership  conference  for  civil  rights  (lccr)  and aba  described  in  a  2004  report, detention leads to pervasive despair:   the  combination  of  physical  isolation,  substandard  conditions  at  facilities,  limited  access to lawyers, and the lack of legal information demoralizes many detainees some, even to the point that they give up their cases and agree to be deported rather  than continue to be imprisoned.
(lccr and aba 2004, 68-69)  attorneys  and  pastoral  workers  from  catholic  agencies  have  learned  first-hand  of  the  sexual abuse of women detainees, women forced to deliver babies in restraints, frequent  hunger strikes, suicides, government officials pressuring detainees to abandon their legal  claims, and the treatment of severe medical conditions with tylenol, advil, and motrin.


in  the past, visitors faced arbitrary and often cruel visitation policies, and detention centers  provided scant access to outside groups and even barred groups that reported on deplorable  conditions  or  abuse.
one  facility  placed  mentally  ill  detainees  in  a  cell  with  one-way  mirrors that prevented medical personnel or guards from seeing them.


another enforced  a  no-smoking  policy  which  applied  to  the  prison  grounds  outside,  but  not  to  its  living  areas.
in addition, a burgeoning set of studies has documented shortages in legal counsel,  particularly for detainees, and the importance of representation to case outcomes (kuck  2000; ramji-nogales, schoenholtz, and schrag 2007; aba commission on immigration  2010; markowitz et al.


2011).
according  to  ices  2009  assessment  of  the  us  detention  system,  the  agencys  lack  of  expertise and experience in this area made it difficult to develop guidance and evaluate the   13   this report does not cover the custody of unaccompanied minors.


the homeland security act of 2002,  pub.
l.


no.
107-296,  116  stat.


2135  (november  25,  2002),  transferred  responsibilities  for  the  care  and  placement of unaccompanied children from immigration and naturalization service (ins) to the department  of health and human services office of refugee resettlement (orr), which oversees refugee resettlement  and integration.
the migration and refugee services (mrs) department of the us conference of catholic  bishops (usccb) has produced a number of superb reports on unaccompanied child migration, including  a 2012 report on the legal outcomes of children placed in long-term foster care and a recent report on the  factors driving child migration to the united states (mrs 2012; mrs 2013).


172  journal on migration and human securityperformance of contractors (schriro 2009, 16).
the study also reported on ices failure to  formally publish policy and procedure or technical manuals specific to detention (ibid.


).
an analysis of ice information systems that same year concluded that the agency failed to  collect sufficient information that would allow it to identify persons eligible for possible  release or to track compliance with its own standards (kerwin and lin 2009).


this finding  explained, in part, years of futility by government oversight and human rights agencies  that criticized the detention system for its failures to abide by established legal standards  and to safeguard rights.
in 2014, the gao reported that data collection and maintenance  limitations prevented ice headquarters from evaluating whether field offices had complied  with  its  guidance  related  to  the  transition  to  a  less  restrictive  technology-only atd  program following a period of compliance with the full-service program (gao 2014,  20-26).


in addition, the gao faulted ice for not collecting data on appearance rates for  participants in technology-only atd programs (ibid.
, 31).


unfortunately, severe problems have persisted since the inception of dhs-ices detention  reform initiative.
in march 2015, usccbs migration and refugee services (mrs) called  for an end to family detention, arguing that the governments use of detention in order to  deter migration violated international law, led to the return of young mothers and children  to  perilous  situations,  and  undermined  the  best  interests  of  the  child  standard  (mrs  2015, 2-4).


other recent reports have documented:   the removal in 2013 of 72,000 persons who claimed to have us-born children  (dhs-ice 2014a; dhs-ice 2014b);14 conditions in the makeshift family detention facility in artesia, new mexico, which  the american  immigration  lawyers association  characterized  as  a  due process failure and humanitarian disaster and which the obama administration subsequently decided to close (aila 2014; dhs-ice 2014d); the  extensive  lobbying  by  for-profit  prison  corporations  and  the  rising  share  of immigrants detained in private facilities (carson and diaz 2015, 6, 11-14); the legal severance of parent-child relationships as a result of us detention and deportation practices (arc 2011); prolonged detention in a system intended for short-term custody (heeren 2010); federal  officials  that  pressure  detainees  without  legal  counsel  to  stipulate  to removal, often based on inaccurate information and a promise of diminished time in custody (koh, srikantiah, and tumlin 2011); confining  children  and  others  arrested  by  the  border  patrol  in  extremely  cold holding cells for extended periods (aij 2013); hunger strikes in response to poor conditions in the northwest detention center in tacoma, washington  and  the  stewart  detention  center  in  lumpkin,  georgia (altman 2014; redmon 2014); the  use  of  long-term,  unchecked  solitary  confinement  in  ice  contract  facilities (nijc and phr 2012);15 sexual abuse, harassment, and deficiencies in reporting on and recording incidents                   14   given that 4.
5 million us citizen children have an unauthorized parent and another million children are  themselves unauthorized (pew hispanic center 2013), removal and detention policies invariably separate  parents from their children.


15   solitary confinement has been used for persons that present disciplinary concerns, but also to protect  persons who are at risk of abuse and violence from other detainees (gruberg 2013, 6-7).
173  unlocking human dignity          of sexual misconduct (hrw 2010; gao 2013, 18-24); violence,  verbal  abuse  and  discrimination  against  lesbian,  gay,  bisexual  and transgender persons (gruberg 2013); the immigration systems failure to provide case-by-case custody determinations or to rely sufficiently on atds (lirs 2011); deficiencies in for-profit prison facilities (human rights advocates 2010; mason 2012); problems related to due process, legal access, transfers, segregation, overcrowding and religious expression in detention facilities in georgia (acluga 2012); and lower legal representation rates among detained immigrants in the san francisco immigration  court  and  the  difference  counsel  makes  in  case  outcomes  (nccij 2014).


as these reports suggest, the high costs, hardships, and abuses created by the large- scale use of detention will persist without fundamental change.
although laudable, the  current reform initiative has not gone deep enough and will not, by itself, create a truly  civil system, designed to minimize the use of detention, ensure appearances during  the adjudication and removal process, and promote due process and informed decision- making in individual cases.


v.
a national security and criminal paradigm at the heart of the federal immigrant detention system is an anomaly.


on the one hand,  persons subject to detention are in a civil (not criminal) process, albeit one which could  result in their removal, separation from family, loss of livelihood, and return to a place  where they may have few ties or face extreme danger.
on the other hand, a criminal justice/national security paradigm has shaped, guided and  spurred the growth of the us immigration enforcement and detention system.


it is not  surprising that immigrants have been treated as criminals and security threats, given that  they are subject to a legal regime and to custody by an agency devoted to protecting the  homeland against terrorism and transnational crime (dhs 2014c, 14).
16 the fact that dhs- ice regularly reports on its detention and removal of criminal aliens contributes to this  misconception.


for those without criminal histories, detention can be a dispiriting, even crushing response  from a nation which they will soon join, rejoin, or be forced to leave, and from which  they had hoped far better and more.
from a pastoral perspective, detention can put self- sacrificing immigrants at risk of internalizing an inaccurate and even sacrilegious view of  themselves.


for asylum seekers, it can evoke the conditions they have fled (haney 2005,  197; aba commission 2010, 1-53).
most detainees have never been convicted of a crime or have been convicted of a minor,  non-violent  crime.


in  fy  2013,  dhs  removed  a  record  438,421  persons,  including  198,394 (roughly 45 percent) criminal aliens (simansky 2014, 6-7).
17  nearly one-third  of deported criminal aliens in fy 2013 had been convicted of an immigration-related  16   homeland security act of 2002, pub.


l.
no.


107-296, 116 stat.
2135 (november 25, 2002).


17   ice accounted for 75 percent of dhs removals in fy 2013 (simansky 2014, 6).
174  journal on migration and human securityoffense and an additional 15 percent had been convicted of traffic offenses (ibid.


, 7).
18  based on an assessment of threat risk and special vulnerability, ice classifies only 20  percent of detainees as requiring a high custody level (gao 2013, 9).


however, even  high custody detainees have served their sentences (if any) and, with proper supervision  and support, would overwhelmingly appear for court proceedings.
moreover, 44 percent  of ice detainees with criminal histories in 2013 were solely misdemeanants and others  fell  within  an  enforcement  category  that  includes  noncitizens  who  committed  multiple  misdemeanors (dhs-ice 2013a, 3-5).


illegal  entry  has  long  been  a  crime.
however,  ordinary  immigration  offenses  were  historically treated as violations of civil law, leading to deportation proceedings.


between  1986  and  1996,  the  immigration  and  naturalization  service  (ins)  referred  on  average  fewer than 10,000 immigration cases per year for criminal prosecution, and fewer than  8,500  persons  per  year  (on  average)  were  actually  prosecuted  (trac  2002),  typically  for egregious immigration violations.
yet over the last two decades, immigration-related  prosecutions  have  risen  sharply.


this  trend  has  accelerated  in  recent  years,  spurred  by  operation streamline which arrests and prosecutes us-mexico border crossers in particular  sectors and corridors.
operation streamline prosecutions have taken the form of summary,  en  masse  guilty  pleas,  largely  devoid  of  due  process  protections  (kerwin  and  mccabe  2010).


the usccb has strongly opposed the criminalization of us immigration law and  called for the termination of operation streamline.
prosecutions for illegal entry fell in the  first six months of fy 2014 (associated press 2014; trac 2014c), while prosecutions for  illegal re-entry increased.


however, the president has not terminated operation streamline.
immigration  enforcement  has  become  so  intertwined  with  the  federal  criminal  justice  system that the us supreme court has held that the failure of attorneys to advise clients  on  the  immigration  consequences  of  criminal  plea  agreements  constitutes  ineffective  assistance of counsel in violation of the sixth amendment of the us constitution.


19  cbp  and  ice  refer  more  cases  for  criminal  prosecution  and  account  for  more  matters  concluded by us attorneys than all other federal law enforcement agencies combined  (meissner et al.
2013, 99-100; motivans 2013, 14).


in 2010, more than one-half of the  suspects arrested and booked by the us marshals service were arrested by dhs agencies  (motivans 2013, 7).
in  2013,  immigration-related  cases  represented  63  percent  of  all  cases  before  federal  magistrates  (which  mostly  handle  misdemeanors)  and  26  percent  of  the  cases  in  federal  district  courts  (which  handle  felonies)  (rosenblum  and  meissner  2014,  27-28).


immigration-related prosecutions reached nearly 100,000 in fy 2013 (trac 2014a).
20  18   as one of several executive action measures, the obama administration announced on november 20,  2014 that it had altered its enforcement priorities, which govern apprehension, detention, and removal.


it is  unclear how or whether this step will lead to a shift in enforcement patterns.
see, memorandum from dhs  secretary jeh johnson, to thomas s.


winkowski, acting director of ice, r.
gil kerlikowski, commissioner  of us customs and border protection, leon rodriquez, director, us citizenship and immigration services,  and alan d.


bersin, acting assistant secretary for policy.
policies for the apprehension, detention and  removal  of  undocumented  immigrants.


20  november  2014.
http://www.


dhs.gov/sites/default/files/ publications/14_1120_memo_prosecutorial_discretion.
pdf.


19   padilla v.
kentucky, 559 us 356 (2010).


20   between 1995 and 2010, the number of immigration offenders with cases disposed in federal district   175  unlocking human dignitythe overwhelming majority of immigration prosecutions in recent years have been for  illegal entries and illegal re-entries following removal (figure 3), including 95 percent in  2013 (trac 2014b).
the rise in immigration-related prosecutions has diverted federal  law enforcement resources to minor offenders at the expense of the governments ability to  investigate and prosecute transnational criminal enterprises that traffic narcotics, arms, and  human beings (lydgate 2010, 7-9).


figure  3.
immigration  criminal  prosecutions  by  lead  charge, fy 2004-2013  source: trac 2014c.


while  immigration  violations  have  commanded  a  growing  proportion  of  federal  prosecutorial  and  judicial  resources,  the  criminal  justice  system  has  also  substantially  impacted us immigration enforcement strategies and workload.
between 2011 and 2013,  for example, dhs removed more criminal aliens for immigration-related crimes than for  any other category of crime (simansky 2014, 7).


21  dhs-ices  use  of  detention  for  broader  immigration  enforcement,  investigative,  and  deterrent purposes runs afoul of unhcr detention guidelines and us domestic law.
a  potential deprivation of liberty should be based on an individualized assessment by an  impartial adjudicator of the need to detain in furtherance of a legitimate purpose and should  be  regularly  reviewed.


yet  families  fleeing  violence  in  central america  are  now  being  detained in order to deter or stem illegal migration and de facto refugee flows.
courts rose from 5,103 to 39,001 (cohen 2013, 3).


21   many immigration-related crimes carry harsh criminal sentences, including up to 20 years for illegal re- entry following removal.
8 usc 1326(b)(2).


176  journal on migration and human securityit  is  hotly  disputed  whether  detention  to  deter  succeeds  on  its  own  terms.
like  other  nations, the united states assumes this to be the case (preston 2014).


while noting the  very limited available evidence on what enforcement programs are most cost-effective at  deterring illegal migration, one researcher has attributed the abatement in illegal entries  by central american adults in 2006 and 2007 to the end of catch and release22 (roberts  2014).
23 under this practice, immigration officials released non-mexican nationals on their  own recognizance to appear for their removal hearings.


on the other hand, the un special rapporteur on the rights of migrants avers that there is  no empirical evidence that detention deters irregular migration or discourages persons from  seeking asylum and points out that harsh detention policies over a 20-year period have  not resulted in a decrease in irregular migration (un general assembly 2012, 8).
in the  united states, there has been no rigorous examination of whether detention deters illegal  immigration, much less deters persons fleeing for their lives or the lives of their children.


however, even if such persons could be deterred, it would be ethically problematic to do  so and misguided, at best, to use vulnerable persons as a means to this end.
following the 9/11 terrorist attacks, ins detained thousands of middle eastern and south  asian men who the department of justice (doj) required to register with the government,  arriving asylum seekers from countries with an al qaeda presence, and migrants from  haiti (kerwin 2002, 23-4; kerwin 2005, 759-61).


not only have preventive and pre- textual detention been criticized from a civil liberties and international law perspective,  but according to national security experts these tactics make it difficult to uproot terrorist  conspiracies  because  they  alienate  members  of  communities  that  might  otherwise  be  a  source of intelligence (kerwin 2005, 761).
vi.


the problem of mandatory detention the  illegal  immigration  reform  and  immigrant  responsibility  act  of  1996  (iirira)  mandated the detention of broad categories of inadmissible or removable noncitizens,24  including persons subject to expedited removal, who are arrested without documents or  with improper documents at ports of entry or within 100 miles of land or coastal borders.
25  persons in expedited removal can be released if they are found to have a credible fear  of persecution.


in 2003, the usccb and the conferencia del episcopado mexicano (cem)  argued that iirira eviscerated due process rights, led to the detention and deportation of  minor offenders, and separated families (usccb and cem 2003, 92).
in recent years,  more  than  three-quarters  of  noncitizens  in  ice  custody  have  been  deemed  mandatory  detainees (dhs-oig 2014).


although mandatory detention need not preclude a custody   22   roberts, bryan.
prepared statement to us senate committee on homeland security and governmental  affairs.


challenges  at  the  border:  examining  and  addressing  the  root  causes  behind  the  rise  in  apprehensions at the southern border.
113th cong.


, 2nd sess.
, 16 july 2014.


23   for a variety of reasons, persons released at the us-mexico borderwithout orientation, basic information,  support or supervision of any kindshould not be expected to appear at high rates for later court hearings  in different locations.
many will not understand this requirement or even know about scheduled hearings.


24   ina  236 (c)(1); 236a, 212(a)(3)(b); 237(a)(4)(b)).
25   ina 235.


177  unlocking human dignityhearing,26 broad mandatory detention rules make it virtually impossible to create a system  that ensures appearances during the adjudication and removal process through the least  restrictive means possible.
in  2003,  the  supreme  court  upheld  mandatory  detention  for  noncitizens  with  pending  removal cases for the brief period necessary to complete removal proceedings, which the  court found to be a month and a half in the vast majority of cases  and about five months  in the minority of cases in which the alien chooses to appeal.


27 yet as of january 25, 2009,  2,362 persons in removal proceedings had been detained for more than six months, and 570  had been detained for one year or more (kerwin and lin 2009, 16), hardly a brief period.
the number of long-term detainees in removal proceedings has almost certainly increased  in the interim, given growing court delays and backlogs.


by  way  of  contrast,  the  us  supreme  court  has  prohibited  the  indefinite  detention  of  persons ordered removed; i.
e.


, those whose removal proceedings have been completed.
the immigration and nationality act (ina) requires dhs to remove noncitizens within  90 days following receipt of a removal order, provides that dhs shall detain noncitizens  during the removal period, and shall not release those who are inadmissible or deportable  on  criminal  or  national  security  grounds.


28  in  order  to  avoid  finding  this  provision  unconstitutional, the supreme court held that six months after a removal order becomes  final the burden must shift to the government to show there is a significant likelihood of  removal in the reasonably foreseeable future.
29 if the government cannot meet this burden,  the detainee must be released.


in 2003, the court extended this decision to inadmissible  persons or those stopped at a port of entry or border, who are deemed not to have entered  the nation.
30  these latter two decisions have led to a decrease in the number of noncitizens with orders  of removal who are in prolonged or indefinite detention, but long-term detention persists  for large numbers of persons with pending removal proceedings (kerwin and lin 2009,  16-18).


despite the supreme courts apparently disparate holdings, prolonged detention  cannot be reasonably justified based on the stage of the removal adjudication process.
federal  law  treats  noncitizens  in  civil  removal  proceedings  more  harshly  than  it  does  criminal defendants awaiting disposition of their cases or even convicts awaiting sentencing  or the execution of a sentence.


judicial officers must consider federal defendants for release  pending judicial proceedings, the imposition or execution of a sentence, or appeal.
31 at an  initial pre-trial hearing, criminal defendants may be: (1) released on personal recognizance  or on an unsecured bond; (2) released subject to conditions; (3) temporarily detained in  order to permit revocation of conditional release, deportation, or exclusion; or (4) detained.


32  26    one  circuit  court  of  appeals  has  held  that  an  independent  bond  hearingcovering  flight  risk  and  dangerousness is required in cases of prolonged detention (after six-months) for mandatory detainees in  removal proceedings.
rodriguez v.


robbins, no.
12-56734 (9th cir.


2013).
27   demore v.


kim, 538 us 510 (2003).
28   ina 241(a).


29   zadvydas v.
davis, 533 us 678 (2001).


30   clark v.
martinez, 543 us 371, 378 (2005).


31   18 usc 3141.
32   18 usc 3142 (a).


178  journal on migration and human securityfederal law provides that judicial officers should release criminal defendants on personal  recognizance  or  unsecured  bond  unless  they  determine  that  such  release  will  not  reasonably assure the appearance of the person as required or will endanger the safety  of  any  other  person  or  the  community.
33  if  criminal  defendants  cannot  be  released  on  personal  recognizance  or  unsecured  bond,  judicial  officers  must  consider  the  least  restrictive    condition,  or  combination  of  conditions  that  will  reasonably  ensure  the  defendants appearance and the safety of others and the public.


34 federal law presumes  that criminal defendants charged with certain offenses represent a flight risk or danger, but  this presumption can be rebutted.
35 in contrast, noncitizens subject to mandatory detention  cannot avoid detention by demonstrating that they are not a flight risk or danger.


they are  categorically viewed as flight risks, although many are not, particularly those with family  and strong community ties.
persons charged with immigration-related crimes experience the highest rate of pre-trial  incarceration of all federal criminal defendants, higher even than persons accused of violent  crimes and weapons charges (cohen 2013, 3).


between 2008 and 2013, the percentage of  defendants released prior to the disposition of their cases ranged from 28 to 38 percent  (table 1), but would have been far higher if immigration offenders were not included (ao  2014, table h-3 and h-3a).
table  1:  federal  criminal  defendants  released  pretrial,  fy 2008-2013 fiscal  year 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 source: administrative office of the united states courts (ao).


various years.
annual report of  the director: judicial business if the united states courts.


washington dc: ao statistics division,  office  of  judges  programs.
http://www.


uscourts.gov/statistics/judicialbusiness/archive.
aspx;  http://www.


uscourts.gov/statistics/judicialbusiness/2013/statistical-tables-us-district-courts- pretrial.
aspx.


number  released 27,887 27,767 37,790 38,434 34,268 33,834  percent  released 28.
1  27.


9  33.
8 34.


5 34 37.
5  total   99,300  99,426  111,797 111,271 100,838 90,183  between 1995 and 2010, the percentage of released criminal defendants who engaged in  pre-trial  misconduct  ranged  from  16  to  22  percent  (cohen  2013,  8, table  4).


36   yet  the   33   18 usc 3142 (b).
34   18 usc 3142 (c)(b).


35   18 usc 3142 (e).
36   pretrial misconduct includes technical violations of bail conditions, failure to appear at scheduled court  appearances, and arrests for a new offense (cohen 2013, 10).


179  unlocking human dignitypercentage of released criminal defendants who failed to appear for court hearingsi.
e.


,  the primary criterion in the immigrant detention contextdid not exceed three percent in  any year during this period (ibid.
).


moreover, only one percent of the 101,622 defendants  released pretrial for cases disposed in federal district court between 2008 and 2010 failed  to appear (cohen 2012, 13).
states also offer the opportunity for pre-trial release to most criminal defendants (ncsl  2013).


in 2009, 62 percent of felony defendants in the nations 75 largest counties were  released pretrial (reaves 2013, 17).
among the defendants released, 29 percent committed  some form of misconduct (ibid.


, 20).
an estimated 16 percent were rearrested for a new  offense, eight percent for a felony and seven percent for a misdemeanor (ibid.


, 21).
an  estimated 17 percent failed to appear in court, but only three percent failed to appear or  were not returned to court during the one-year study period (ibid.


).
vii.


reasons for the growth of immigrant detention several  factors  have  driven  the  growth  of  the  immigrant  detention  system.
first,  the  law mandates detention in broad categories of cases, guaranteeing the excessive use of  detention  and  precluding  the  release  of  many  persons  who  would  present  little  risk  of  flight if supervised appropriately.


beginning with the anti-drug abuse act of 1988 and  culminating in the iirira, the number of crimes leading to removal has expanded, the  discretion of immigration judges to allow noncitizens to remain based on their equitable ties  in the united states has diminished, and the categories of noncitizens subject to mandatory  detention have increased.
the expansion of crimes labeled aggravated feloniesa term of art unique to immigration  law that encompasses both serious and minor crimes (even misdemeanors)has led to  automatic removal and mandatory detention for thousands of noncitizens, notwithstanding  their length of residence, family or other equitable ties in the united states (lccr and  aba 2004; clinic 2000a).


in addition, non-lprs that dhs believes to be removable as  aggravated felons are subject to a streamlined, administrative removal procedure without  ever appearing before an immigration judge (aba commission 2010, 1-34 to 1-37).
second, as stated, dhs has reinstituted the large-scale detention of families in response to  the increased migration of parents and minor children from the northern triangle nations of  central america.


in 2014, us family detention capacity began to mushroom from roughly  100 beds to several thousand.
37 the projected 3,700 family detention beds translates into  1.


35 million detention bed nights per year, and may not signal the end of the expansion of  this system.
third, immigration enforcement funding has expanded dramatically over the last quarter of  a century.


in 1990, the inss budget was $1.
2 billion.


by 2014, combined funding for cbp  and ice equaled $18 billion (dhs 2014a, 49-50, 64).
however, this figure understates  us spending on immigration enforcement because it does not count the substantial annual   37   from september 2009 until june 2014, ice used only one family detention facility, the berks family  residential facility, a modestly-sized, residential facility (housing 90 to 100 persons per night) located near  reading pennsylvania.


180  journal on migration and human securityexpenditures on enforcement by other dhs agencies and divisions, by non-dhs federal  agencies, and by states and localities.
because congress and successive administrations  have  treated  detention  as  a  centerpiece  of  the  us  immigration  enforcement  system,  detention spending and capacity have grown accordingly.


in  addition,  congress  has  attempted  to  mandate  that  ice  fill  all  34,000  beds  at  its  disposal, whether or not this is necessary based on the agencys enforcement priorities or  operational needs.
correctional officials often seek to decrease the use of prison beds and  save government resources.


yet congress has stipulated that ice shall maintain a level  of not less than 34,000 detention beds,38 which many members interpret to mean that ice  must fill 34,000 beds each night.
however, dhs secretary jeh johnson has testified that  he interprets this language to require that dhs maintain 34,000 beds, not detain 34,000  persons every night.


39  fourth, states and localities have assumed a far greater role over the last several years in  enforcing federal immigration law, both independent of and in partnership with the federal  government.
several major ice enforcement partnerships have targeted noncitizens who  have been arrested or who are serving time for crimes, including secure communities,  the  criminal  alien  program  (cap),  and  the  287(g)  program.


these  programs  have  fed  substantial  numbers  of  persons  into  the  detention  system.
secure  communities,  for  example,  screened  persons  arrested  in  prisons,  jails  and  detention  centers  against  immigration databases in all 3,181 us law enforcement jurisdictions.


between 2011 and  2013, secure communities accounted for an average of 81,000 removals and returns per  year (rosenblum and meissner 2014, 38).
on  november  20,  2014,  the  obama  administration  announced  the  discontinuance  of  the  secure  communities  program  as  one  of  its  executive  action  measures.


40  however,  the  centerpiece  of  the  secure  communities  programice  screening  for  immigration  violations through use of the fingerprints taken by state and local law enforcement agencies  following an arrestwill remain a feature of its successor program.
henceforth, ice will  only seek the transfer into its custody of noncitizens who come within its new priority 1  and 2 removal categories (ibid.


).
moreover, ice will not ask local law enforcement to hold  or detain noncitizens beyond the time they would normally be held, but simply to notify  ice prior to the release of a noncitizen in state or local custody (ibid.


).
fifth, the detention system is an adjunct to the removal system.


detention has been used  to ensure appearances throughout the adjudication and removal process.
thus, it is not  surprising that annual immigrant detention increases have paralleled increases in removals  (figure 4).


in recent years, greater use of administrative, summary, expedited, and non- court  removals  have  resulted  in  annual  detention  increases,  particularly  for  short-term  detainees (noferi 2014).
38   consolidated and further continuing appropriation act, 2013, division d, title ii, (p.


l.
113-6).


39    johnson,  jeh.
statement  to  the  house  of  representatives,  subcommittee  on  homeland  security.


department of homeland securitys fy 2015 budget request: hearing before the subcommittee on homeland  security.
113th cong.


, 2nd sess.
, 11 march 2014.


40   johnson, jeh.
memorandum from dhs secretary, to thomas s.


winkowski, acting director of ice,  megan mack, officer of dhs office of civil rights and civil liberties, and philip a.
mcnamara, dhs  assistant secretary for intergovernmental affairs.


secure communities.
20 november 2014.


http://www.
dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/14_1120_memo_secure_communities.


pdf.
181  unlocking human dignityfigure 4.


annual detainees and removals, fy 2001-2013  sources: simansky 2014, 5-6; dhs 2013, 103; ins/dhs.
various years.


yearbook of immigration  statistics.
washington dc: dhs, office of immigration statistics.


http://www.
dhs.gov/yearbook- immigration-statistics.


noncitizens may be ordered removed by an immigration judge acting within the executive  office for immigration review (eoir), a division of the doj, or through more summary  processes.
during a formal removal hearing before an immigration judge, a noncitizen has  the right to present evidence, call witnesses, and contest the governments assertion that he  or she is removable.


he or she may also apply for certain forms of discretionary relief from  removal, including asylum, withholding of removal, adjustment of status, and cancellation  of  removal.
if  an  immigration  judge  determines  that  a  noncitizen  is  inadmissible  or  deportable, and does not qualify for relief from removal, the judge may issue a formal  removal order.


however,  there  are  also  several  truncated  and  accelerated  removal  procedures  which  entail minimal process and operate either entirely outside the immigration court system or  receive only cursory judicial review and oversight.
the usccb committee on migration  has urged that the use of these proceedings be minimized.


similarly, the aba commission  on immigration has cautioned that these processes provide unprecedented authority to  low-level immigration officers and preclude the oversight of an impartial adjudicator,  are radically accelerated and largely insulated from public scrutiny and judicial review  (aba  commission  2006,  107c,  9).
in  2010,  the aba  commission  decried  the  shift  toward a removal system in which immigration courts play no or only a perfunctory role  and  dhs  is  responsible  for  all  steps  in  the  process,  from  apprehension  and  detention  to  issuing  the  order  and  deporting  the  individual  (aba  commission  2010,  1-36).


a  december 2014 study found that 83 percent of removals now take place without a hearing   182  journal on migration and human securityor a chance to present legal claims to an immigration judge, including 95 percent of the  cases of mexican unaccompanied children (aclu 2014, 6 and 11).
accelerated, non-court  procedures include:   expedited  removal,  which  accounted  for  193,032  removals  in  2013  (simansky 2014,  5),  applies  to  noncitizens  who  attempt  to  enter  the  united  states  without entry  documents  or  by  using  improper  documents, who  are  arrested  within  100 miles of us land and coastal borders, who have been present in the united states for less than two years, and who fail to demonstrate a credible fear of persecution in their home countries.


persons ordered removed pursuant to expedited removal do not receive a hearing before an immigration judge.
reinstatement of removal, which accounted for 170,247 removals in 2013 (ibid.


), applies to persons who have been previously ordered removed or have departed voluntarily  while  under  a  removal  order,  and  who  illegally  re-enter  the  united states.
persons in this situation often have family and long tenure in the united states, but are summarily removed with only minimal process.


41     administrative removal in which dhs issues an order of removal to a noncitizen who  is  not  an  lpr  and  who  dhs  believes  to  be  removable  as  an  aggravated felon.
there were 127,376 administrative removals from fy 2003 to fy 2013 (rosenblum and mccabe 2014, 23).


stipulated orders of removal, in which a noncitizen waives his or her right to a formal removal proceedingoften due to pressure from government officials and a desire to escape detention (koh, srikantiah, and tumlin 2011, 3-7)and agrees to be removed.
42 while ice does not publish statistics on stipulated removals, a 2011 study estimated that 160,000 stipulated removals had taken place in the previous decade, including one-third of all removals in 2008 (ibid.


, 1, 14).
the study found that virtually all stipulated removal cases involved detainees and that 96 percent of persons removed under this process lacked legal representation (ibid.


, 1, 7-8).
43 sixth, the massive us enforcement system funnels noncitizens into a grossly underfunded  immigration court system that receives roughly $300 million per year or one-sixtieth the  level of cbp and ice funding (doj 2014; dhs 2014a).


by the end of march 2015, a record  441,939 cases were pending before immigration judges, with the average case pending 599  days and delays in some courts reaching more than two years (trac 2015).
immigration  judges  expedite  removal  cases  involving  detainees.


however,  because  detention  is  a  function of the removal process, delays in the adjudication of removal cases necessarily  lead to increased, long-term detention.
a one-night snapshot of ice detainees in january  2009 found that 4,154 had been detained for more than six months (kerwin and lin 2009,  41   noncitizens may challenge a determination that they are subject to reinstatement of removal in a written  or oral statement to an immigration officer.


8 cfr  241.
8.


42   under the law, immigration judges are required to determine if the waivers are voluntary, knowing, and  intelligent.
8 cfr  1003.


25(b).
43   one study also counts voluntary return or departure as an additional summary, non-court form of removal.


under it, noncitizens agree to leave the country, but without receiving a formal removal order with all its  negative legal consequences.
however, this process can ill-serve persons with a legal claim to remain.


an  estimated 23,455 voluntary returns took place in fy 2013 (aclu 2014, 23).
183  unlocking human dignity22).


these delays waste valuable government resources, needlessly disrupt the lives of  immigrants who will ultimately be found eligible for immigration relief, and prolong the  removal process for noncitizens who have no possibility of remaining.
44   viii.


overreliance on private prisons private prison agencies administer large swaths of the immigrant detention system.
ins  began to contract with for-profit entities in the late 1970s (mcdonald 1994).


in 1983, the  correctional corporation of america (cca) was incorporated and in 1984 it contracted  with ins for a 350 bed immigrant detention facility (green and mazn 2012).
by 2014,  cca was the worlds largest for-profit prison corporation, with 37 percent of the us market  in private correctional facilities (prisons and immigrant detention centers), and $1.


7 billion  in total revenue in 2013 (ibisworld 2014).
the wackenhut corporation, a predecessor to  the geo group, received its first immigrant detention contract in 1987 (mason 2012, 4).


in 2014, the geo groups market share of the us private correctional industry was 22  percent, and its revenue exceeded $1 billion in 2013 (ibisworld 2014).
45 in 2014, geo  and cca detained a combined 45 percent of the us immigrant detention population each  night (carson and diaz 2015, 8).


in late 1988, private detention facilities held roughly 800 immigrants (mcdonald 1994).
at  present,  19  percent  of  detainees  are  held  in  privately  owned  and  operated  facilities  (gao 2013, 10).


however, this figure excludes the state and local contract facilities that  are administered by private entities, and does not speak to the extensive private contracts  for  services  within  detention  facilities.
thus,  a  2009  report  found  that  for-profit  prison  agencies  administered  12  of  the  17  largest  detention  facilities,  which  collectively  held  more than one-half of all detainees (kerwin and lin 2009, 14-16).


in 2012, 62 percent of  the 50 facilities with the largest immigrant detainee populations were privately operated  (mason 2012, 8).
by 2015, for-profit prison corporations administered nine of the nations  ten largest immigrant detention centers (carson and diaz 2015, 6-7).


private prisons also contract with the us marshalls service (usms) to hold persons in  federal custody prior to the disposition of their criminal cases.
in 2011, 30 percent of usms  detainees were held in privately-operated facilities, up from seven percent in 2000 (mason  2012, 7).


forty percent of usms detainees in 2011 had been arrested for immigration- related crimes, primarily illegal entry and re-entry (ibid.
, 3).


private prison agencies also  manage bop facilities, which hold substantial numbers of prisoners serving sentences for  immigration-related crimes (green and mazn 2012, 20).
for-profit prisons did not enter the immigrant detention business based on a track record  of successfully providing detention services (nathan 2007).


the rise of this industry has  been attributed to a combination of factors, including the trend toward privatization of  government services, the ability of private contractors to create detention capacity more  rapidly  than  government  (by  avoiding  government  procurement  procedures  and  bond   44   while court backlogs can partly be explained by the growth in the us enforcement system, they are also  due in part to ices insufficient use of alternative to detention programs.
45   the us immigrant detention system served as the gateway for these private companies entry into the  correctional field (green and mazn 2012, 9; mcdonald 1994; flynn 2014).


184  journal on migration and human securityissuances that fund prison construction), rising demand for detention and prison beds, poor  government performance in administering prisons, promises of lower costs, dhs-ices  lack of expertise in managing a detention system, and the lack of accountability to dhs- ice by state and local contractors (schriro 2010, 1442; nathan 2007; mcdonald 1994).
private prison agencies argue that they provide higher-quality, more accountable services  at  less  cost  than  the  government.


46  some  claim  to  have  a  vested  financial  interest  in  performing  well  under  government  contracts  (flynn  and  cannon  2009,  16),  and  to  be  acutely responsive to whatever policy direction or reforms the government initiates.
many  studies and reports vigorously dispute these claims and highlight scandalous levels of abuse  in privately administered facilities.


47 in addition, the for-profit prison industry lobbies in  its financial self-interest, including for funding for services that government agencies do  not need or want (dow 2004, 97) and for draconian immigration enforcement laws (like  arizonas s.
b.


1070) that have been opposed by the obama administration.
the  us  immigrant  detention  system  should  substantially  contract.


yet  private  prison  agencies seek to maximize profits for their shareholders and to expand the market for their  services.
the associated press reported in 2012 that cca, geo, and the management and  training corporation had spent $45 million in federal and state lobbying and in campaign  donations over the previous decade (associated press 2012).


in 2011, cca reportedly spent  $2 million on federal lobbying and employed 37 federal lobbyists in four firms, as well as  its own in-house lobbyists (mason 2012, 13).
generally, cca has sought appropriations  for  ice,  bureau  of  prisons  and  us  marshalls  service  which  can  be  used  to  fund  its  detention work (ibid.


, 14).
for-profit prison agencies also helped to champion model  state enforcement legislation that gave rise to arizonas sb 1070 and other draconian state  bills (sullivan 2010), which the us bishops strongly opposed.


many provisions in these  bills were found to be unconstitutional.
one of the guiding principles of the current detention reform initiative is the need to provide  federal oversight of key detention operations and track performance and outcomes (schriro  2009).


yet according to the founding director of its office of detention policy and planning,  ices lack of expertise in administering the immigrant detention system has undermined  its ability to identify services for which it should contract, to oversee its contracts with  states, localities, and for-profit prisons, to assess performance under these contracts, and to  address deficiencies (schriro 2010, 1442).
given the substantial privatization of the us  immigrant detention system, there is a particular need for robust government oversight to  promote compliance with standards and to correct breaches of them (flynn and cannon  2009, 7).


as one global study has concluded, the incentive for for-profit corporations to perform well  can be undermined by extremely close ties between facility operators and government   46   while this section primarily addresses for-profit prisons, humanitarian organizations provide detention  services in portugal, france and elsewhere (flynn and cannon 2009, 16).
47   one report found that the emphasis by private prisons on cost-cutting can lead to substandard conditions,  understaffed facilities, poorly compensated guards, less training, higher turnover, and greater levels of abuse   (mason 2012, 12).


the cca-operated t.
don hutto residential center in williamson county, texas for  detained  immigrant  families  was,  for  example,  the  object  of  numerous  scathing  reports  (see,  lirs  and  womens commission 2007).


185  unlocking human dignitydecision-makers, the consolidation of large parts of a market under one or a few companies,  the success of the private prison industry in advocating to expand their business and to fight  robust regulation, and the absence of substantial oversight by independent entities (ibid.
, 16- 17).


in fact, these conditions can be found in varying degrees in the united states.
indeed, if  accountability can be diminished by the consolidation of large parts of a market under one  or a few companies (ibid.


, 16), it is instructive to note that nearly 60 percent of the private  correctional market is consolidated under the worlds two largest correctional corporations,  cca and geo.
in addition, the privatization of the detention system incentivizes detention  growth, makes effective oversight and accountability difficult and, in the united states,  has created a network of politically active agencies with a financial self-interest in a large  immigration enforcement and detention infrastructure.


an important element of oversight is access to information about the detention system by  the press, service providers, faith-based organizations, human rights agencies, and other  ngos.
yet one international study has decried the shroud of commercial confidentiality that  prevents proper public scrutiny and accountability of government-private sector contractual  relationships  and  operations  (nathan  2007).


in  addition,  private  prison  agencies  have  claimed immunity from and actively resisted coverage under freedom of information laws,  compounding the challenge of accountability and oversight (nathan 2007; human rights  advocates 2010).
according to a lengthy expos on immigrant detention, the marriage of  ins (now dhs) and private corporations led to increased resistance to public scrutiny of  the detention system (dow 2004, 90-91).


many argue that imprisonment and detention should be the province of the government,  not private entities.
in 2009, the supreme court of israel banned for-profit prisons, holding  that the transfer of state authority to imprison and to enforce the law would infringe on the  fundamental rights to personal freedom and human dignity (paulsworth 2009).


certainly,  it would be unconstitutional and a derogation of its sovereign responsibilities if the us  government were to cede authority for custody decisions and detention to non-state actors.
it would be equally dangerous if the detention system were to reach the tipping point at  which the federal government no longer exercised sufficient control or oversight of it.


finally, detention and the broader criminalization of immigration has shaped the publics  view  of  unauthorized  immigrants  as  criminals  (ackerman  and  furman  2013),  creating  an environment conducive to seeing even the most vulnerable as a business opportunity  (flatow 2014).
for all of these reasons, private corporations should have a more limited  and modest role in a shrinking detention system.


ix.
need to expand the use of alternatives to detention ices  fy  2010-2014  strategic  plan  identified  the  need  to  develop  a  cost  effective  alternatives to detention program that results in high rates of compliance as a centerpiece  of its detention reform initiative (dhs-ice 2010, 7).


well-managed atd programs have  proven effective in ensuring high appearance rates at far less cost (financial and human)  than  detention.
between  1987  and  1999,  for  example,  mrs  administered  a  successful   186  journal on migration and human securityreintegration  program  for  indefinitely  detained  mariel  cubans.


48  in  1999  and  2000,  catholic charities of new orleans administered an effective, self-funded atd program  for indefinite detainees with criminal records and asylum seekers (clinic 2000b, 26-28).
both of these programs achieved high rates of compliance.


similarly, the vera institute  for justices pilot appearance assistance program from february 1997 to march 2000  achieved an overall court appearance rate of 90 percent (vera institute 2000).
there are two general types of atd programs.


the first type relies heavily on technology,  extensive reporting, monitoring and visitation.
the second relies on community-based  support and case-management services.


at present, ice funds two large atd programs of  the first kind, full service and technology assisted atds (dhs 2014b, 62-63).
49 in the  full service program, contractors use a combination of case management and monitoring,  including the use of tracking devices and home and office visits.


by 2014, full service  programs were available in 45 cities (gao 2014, 9).
technology assisted programs use  only monitoring technology and do not include case management services (dhs 2014b,  62-63).


technology-only programs are available in 96 locations (gao 2014, 11).
as a  general matter, electronic monitoring devices violate human dignity and should be used  only in rare cases, when case management or monitoring is not available.


an ankle bracelet (electronic monitoring device) and the violation  of human dignity esmerelda,  a  mother  of  three  us-citizen  children,  was  placed  in  an  ankle  bracelet  by ice.
the bracelet humiliated her and impeded her life, as it went off in public as  she was shopping for groceries and caused a rash on her leg and increased her angst  and sleeplessness.


the ankle bracelet also reminded her that she could be separated  from her children and family.
in addition, she experienced harassment from an ice  officer, who asked her when she would go home and told her that staying in the us  would only hurt, not help, her family.


esmerelda asked for help from her local priest,  who advocated on her behalf with lawmakers.
finally, one lawmaker from congress  showed concern and intervened to have her ankle bracelet removed.


esmerelda was  given a new ice officer.
since the ankle bracelets removal, esmerelda has been much  more active in her community and she cooks at her parish for special events.


she is an  active member of her parish and assists the priest with projects in the community.
between fy 2011 and 2013, the full service atd program yielded an appearance rate of  99 percent at court hearings and 95 percent at scheduled final removal hearings (ibid.


,  30).
50 ice does not collect or report on similar performance results for the technology-only  program (ibid.


, 31).
48   mrs is now administering an integrated, community-based atd pilot program for persons who would  otherwise be detained, including asylum seekers, torture survivors, pregnant women, primary caregivers, the  elderly and victims of crime.


49    the technology assisted program uses monitoring technology only and does not include case management  services (dhs 2014b, 62-63).
50   in fy 2012, the atd programs performance measures were adjusted: final hearing appearance rates and  average cost per participant are no longer the primary focus.


instead, the atd program focuses on the number  of removals (gao 2014, 65).
187  unlocking human dignitytable 2.


the average daily number of individuals in  atd programs, fy 2009-fy2013 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 source: dhs.
2014.


us immigration and customs enforcement salaries and expenses:  congressional justification fiscal year 2015.
washington dc: dhs.


http://www.
dhs.gov/sites/ default/files/publications/dhs-congressional-budget-justification-fy2015.


pdf.
17,586 16,532 17,957 23,034 22,090  in 2013, there were roughly 22,090 persons in atd programs on an average night, with the  great majority in full-service programs (table 2), compared to roughly 34,000 in detention  facilities.


in  addition  a  total  of  40,864  unique  or  individual  noncitizens  participated  in  these two programs in fy 2013 (gao 2014, 13-14).
because immigration courts fast- track the cases of detainees, persons in atd programs remain in those program on average  for  longer  periods  than  detainees  remain  in  custody.


yet  even  accounting  for  slower  turnover among atd participants than detainees, atd programs cost substantially less  than  detention.
the  average  immigrant  detention  bed  cost  $158  per  night  in  fy  2013,  compared to $10.


55 for the average daily cost of atd programs (gao 2014, 18-20).
yet  ice devotes only a fraction of its detention budget to atd programs (figure 5).


as these  figures demonstrate, it would be cost-effective if dhs-ice more widely utilized atds  and if congress appropriated more funding for them.
congress should also appropriate far  greater amounts to the immigration court system in order to expedite hearings, to reduce  court backlogs and, by extension, to reduce detention and atd costs.


the second type of atd program relies on community-based support, case management  services, and individual service plans to mitigate flight risk.
these programs have traditionally  received only modest, if any, government funding.


they avoid the stigmatization caused  by electronic ankle monitors and other restrictive forms of supervision, while relying on  community-based services and resources to accomplish the same purpose.
case managers  educate  and  assist  participants  to  comply  with  ice  and  immigration  court  reporting  requirements,  and  help  them  to  secure  legal  assistance.


these  programs  also  work  to  integrate persons who may be eligible to remain in the united states, with an emphasis on  job readiness and placement services.
they also assist persons who are ordered removed to  establish contact with family and other support systems in their countries of origin.


188  journal on migration and human securityfigure  5.
appropriations  for  custody  operations  and  alternatives to detention, fy 2005 to 2014  source: dhs.


various years.
dhs budget in brief.


washington dc: dhs.
http://www.


dhs.gov/ dhs-budget;  congressional  research  service  (crs).
various  years.


department  of  homeland  security appropriations.
washington dc: crs.


http://fas.org/sgp/crs/homesec/.
x.


recommendations for reform catholic  social  teaching  recognizes  the  authority  and  responsibility  of  sovereign  states  to regulate migration in furtherance of the common good.
on this basis, the us bishops  have strongly advocated for broad immigration reform legislation, including humane and  effective enforcement policies.


properly crafted legislation could substantially reduce the  pressure of the us immigration enforcement and immigration court system, and facilitate  reform of the us detention system.
however, detention reform does not require and should  not wait for passage of comprehensive reform legislation.


the us immigrant detention system is neither humane nor, in its current form, necessary.
the underlying purpose of detentionto ensure appearances during the adjudication and  removal process, and, in rare cases, to protect the publiccan be served more efficiently  and humanely through a large-scale investment in supervised release, case management  and  community  support  programs,  than  through  detention.


51  as  an  overarching   51   the unhcr detention guidelines describe a range of atds for asylum seekers, including release with  reporting to immigration authorities or case managers, release on the condition that the asylum seeker will  reside  in  a  particular  residence,  release  on  bond  or  on  the  condition  that  a  guarantor  or  surety  assumes  responsibility for ensuring court appearances, and release with community support and supervision programs  (unhcr 2012, 41-45).
similarly, the aba civil detention standards identify a continuum of strategies and   189  unlocking human dignityrecommendation, the us immigrant detention system should be replaced with a flexible,  humane and less costly continuum of release programs that honor due process, uphold  the rights of noncitizens and ensure court appearances and removal.


as a preliminary step  toward  that  goal,  congress  should  commission  a  comprehensive  study  on  the  benefits,  challenges, cost, and time frame for creating a truly civil immigrant detention system.
this  study should include a review of the pre-trial release infrastructure of federal and state  criminal justice systems, and an analysis of how these systems could serve as a template for  a court-based immigration compliance system to replace the current detention system.


some commentators support a large-scale detention system on the grounds that immigrants  have a greater motive to abscond than criminal defendants, as evidenced by their low court  appearance rates in past studies.
yet many persons in removal proceedings enjoy strong  family, employment, and community ties in the united states, making them unlikely to  abscond with proper supervision and support.


sixty percent (6.
6 million in total) of the  unauthorized have lived in the united states for 10 years or more and 17 percent (1.


9  million)  for  at  least  20  years  (warren  and  kerwin  2015,  86-7,  99).
in  addition,  civil  detainees present less of a public safety risk than criminal defendants.


moreover,  the  choice  is  not  betweenas  past  studies  would  indicateoutright  release  or detention.
rather, congress should fund and dhs should create a full menu of atd  programs,  with  varying  degrees  of  support  and  supervision,  reporting,  oversight  and  monitoring.


the expansion of community-based, case management programs should be a  particular priority.
supervised release programs have yielded extremely high approval rates.


in addition, such programs have long been an indispensable feature of the criminal justice  system, ensuring high appearance rates at modest cost.
several additional recommendations  for reform of the us immigrant detention system follow.


first, immigrant detention has too often been used as a deterrent to illegal migration and  even de facto refugee flows, as well as a broad brush strategy to uncover and disrupt possible  terrorist conspiracies.
52 it has also been employed as part of a broader enforcement strategy  to prevent refugees and other migrants who are fleeing violence from reaching territorial  protection (flynn 2014).


the use of detention for these purposes has pushed the boundaries  of legality and, at times, has been counter-productive.
rather than putting immigration and  protection policies in service to the human person (benedict xvi 2007), these strategies  have treated human beings as a means to an end.


the well-being of individuals should not  be sacrificed to broad, often misguided law enforcement and national security strategies.
our nation can achieve security only by respecting human rights, not by undermining them.


in 2003, us and mexican bishops argued that unauthorized immigrants should be detained  for the least amount of time possible, and should have access to the necessary medical,   programs short of detention, from release on recognizance or parole, to release on bond, to community- based supervised release programs, to alternative to detention programs with various levels of supervision,  to home detention (with strict conditions) that represent an alternative form of detention, to detention in  civil detention facilities (aba 2012, 4, note 1).
52   the dhs office of immigration statistics defines detention more narrowly as the physical custody of an  alien in order to hold him/her, pending a determination on whether the alien is to be removed from the united  states or awaiting return transportation to his/her country of citizenship, after a final order of removal has  been entered (simansky and sapp 2013, 2).


190  journal on migration and human securitylegal, and spiritual services (usccb and cem 2003, 94).
they also called for the release  of migrants found to have a credible fear of persecution (ibid.


).
detention should only be  used sparingly, for brief periods (when necessary), and as a last resort when less restrictive  strategies  cannot  reasonably  ensure  appearances  during  the  adjudication  and  removal  process  and  cannot  protect  the  public.


53  prolonged  detentionfor  persons  in  removal  proceedings and for those who have been ordered removedshould be eliminated.
second, an expanded supervised released, case-management and community-support atd  infrastructure  should  not  be  located  within  a  homeland  security,  law  enforcement,  and  paramilitary organization with little competency or experience in providing these services.


instead, congress should transfer the responsibility to manage atds from dhs-ice to  an arm of the federal government better suited to the care and custody of noncitizens.
the  successful transfer of responsibility for unaccompanied minors to the office of refugee  resettlement  (orr)  under  the  homeland  security act  of  2002  represents  a  promising  model in this regard.


54  third,  congress  should  eliminate  mandatory  detention  in  all  but  the  most  egregious  criminal and national security cases.
in the overwhelming majority of cases, immigration  judges or judicial officers should be permitted to consider the full range of equities and  release options for persons in removal proceedings, whether formal court proceedings or  non-court, administrative and summary processes.


mandatory detention does not permit  individualized  release  determinations  and,  thus,  prevents  consideration  of  family  ties,  employment, housing, criminal history, and other factors that may be relevant to release  determinations and conditions (aba commission 2010, i-52).
ices 2009 assessment of the us detention system, which led to the current administrative  reform initiative, recommended the establishment of a system of immigration detention  with the requisite management tools and informational systems to detain and supervise  aliens in a setting consistent with assessed risk (schriro 2009, 3).


yet mandatory detention  precludes release even by persons who can demonstrate that they present no risk of flight and  danger.
just as pre-trial custody hearings do not require the release of dangerous criminal  defendants, hearings on immigrant detention would not require the release of persons who  are likely to abscond or pose a danger to others.


rather, they would allow immigration  judges  or  judicial  officers  to  weigh  individual  equities  against  a  continuum  of  release  options, with the goal of ensuring appearances in the least intrusive, most efficient way  possible.
the status quo system unconscionably denies an impartial review of a potential  deprivation of liberty with all of the attendant negative consequences for immigrants and  their families.


55    53   the aba civil detention standards provide that detention should only be used based upon an objective  determination that he or she presents a threat to national security or public safety or a substantial flight risk  that cannot be mitigated through parole, bond, or a less restrictive form of custody or supervision (aba  2012, 4).
54   to point out this precedent is not to propose that orr be vested with responsibility for the majority of  adults in removal proceedings or who are awaiting removal.


55   as the supreme court stated in zadvydas v.
davis, 533 us 678, 690, freedom from government custody,  detention, or other forms of physical restraint, lies at the heart of the liberty interest protected by the fifth  amendments due process clause.


191  unlocking human dignityfourth, the role of for-profit prison agencies in the immigrant detention system should  be curtailed and rigorously monitored.
some argue that private prisons are particularly  responsive to whatever reforms the government initiates.


yet these agencies have supported  draconian enforcement laws, which they presumably think will lead to greater business  opportunities.
in  addition,  they  have  reportedly  lobbied  for  services  that  government  agencies do not want or need (dow 2004, 97).


custody  determinations  and  imprisonment  implicate  liberty,  human  flourishing,  the  integrity  of  families,  and  contributory  justice.
states  exist  to  promote  these  shared  goods.


yet  the  government  has  increasingly  ceded  responsibility  for  this  function  to  private,  for-profit  entities  whose  primary  loyalties  run  to  their  shareholders,  not  to  the  common good.
investors and private prison agencies have viewed even the tragic increase  in unaccompanied child minors as a business and investment opportunity (flatow 2014).


while us immigration agencies do not have a stellar track record in administering the  detention system, the solution is not greater reliance on for-profit prisons.
rather it is to  decrease the use of detention, to develop greater government expertise, and to strengthen  oversight of any private contractors that may be necessary.


in 2003, the us and mexican bishops pointed out that the presence of the church within  detention facilities and jails is an expression of hospitality and communion with migrants,  as well as an essential way of addressing the human rights violations that migrants may  face when they are apprehended (usccb and cem 2003, 42).
for these reasons, the  us government should provide generous access to international organizations, faith-based  groups, ngos and the press, to all of its immigrant detention facilities.


56 for-profit prisons  are more likely to maintain or improve the quality of their services with high degrees  of surveillance and oversight, particularly by international organizations or other supra- national bodies (flynn and cannon 2009, 16).
moreover, by their nature, human beings  must be free to practice their faith.


religious practice provides particular consolation to  persons  in  trying  circumstances,  like  detention.
thus,  all  detention  facilities  should  be  required to provide generous access to religious services, activities and personnel.


fifth,  detention  reform  requires  the  wholesale  expansion  of  atd  programs.
in  2014,  nearly $2 billion of ices $5.


61 billion budget was devoted to detention, but only $91  million to atd programs and virtually nothing to community-based, case management  atd programs.
this means that ice devotes less than five percent of its detention budget  to supervise nearly 40 percent of those in its custody on a given night, counting persons in  detention and in atd programs.


it could save additional monies if it leveraged community- based networks and organizations to provide case management and support services.
dhs should rely far more heavily on the least restrictive atd programs needed to ensure  appearances and protect the public.


atd programs should not be used to expand detention  capacity, as has occurred in the criminal justice system.
57 like detention, intensive reporting   56   the aba civil detention standards likewise provide that independent observers should be permitted to  monitor conditions in facilities, to assess compliance with these standards, and to issue public reports with  findings and recommendations (aba 2012, 5).


57   between 1982 and 2007, the number of persons imprisoned and jailed in the united states grew from  612,496 to 2,293,157, while the number of persons under community supervision grew from 1,581,868 to  5,117,528 (pew center on the states 2009, 40).
192  journal on migration and human securityand monitoring programs can stigmatize and incapacitate persons, and should not be used  if effective, less restrictive alternatives are available.


unfortunately, atd programs have  been used to expand detention capacity in the form of highly restrictive programs, not to  decrease its use.
in addition, atd programsparticularly highly restrictive programs should  be  viewed  as  a  form  of  custody,  which  would  allow  mandatory  detainees  to  participate in them.


the  ina  provides  that  dhs  shall  take  into  custody  broad  categories  of  noncitizens  who have committed criminal offenses and such persons may be released only in limited  circumstances.
58 a noncitizen subject to conditions set and controlled by the government whether  via  supervised  release,  electronic  monitoring,  or  placement  in  an  alternative  facilityeffectively  remains  in  governments  custody.


remarkably,  certain  federal  prisoners can serve parts of their sentences through supervised release programs that entail  home detention or confinement in other community settings, but atds have not been made  available to mandatory detainees in civil removal proceedings.
59   sixth, ices 2009 assessment of the us detention system highlighted several problems  related to its information systems, including the sufficiency of data collected, the datas  reliability,  its  availability,  its  storage,  and  its  strategic  use  (schriro  2009,  3,  15-18).


a  separate  report  concluded  that  ice  did  not  collect  sufficient  information  to  allow  it  to  identify  persons  who  should  be  considered  for  release  or  to  ensure  adherence  with  its  own standards of confinement (kerwin and lin 2009, 5).
problems with data collection  and use continue to undermine the integrity of the detention system.


this is evidenced by  ices failure to track court appearance rates by participants in one of its signature atd  programs and its inability to measure compliance with its guidance to place noncitizens  in  less  restrictive atd  programs  after  they  have  successfully  met  full-service  program  requirements for 90 days (gao 2014, 20-22, 31).
ice  should  undertake  and  communicate  the  results  of  a  comprehensive  analysis  of  its  information systems.


this review should identify the information ice tracks on those  subject to its custody; how, when, and which officials collect, enter, and can access this  information;  its  quality  control  procedures;  and  the  accessibility  of  this  information  to  congressional  oversight  committees,  government  watchdog  agencies,  and  relevant  ice  officials.
seventh, the detention of families with children, particularly detention for the purpose of  attempting to deter others from seeking protection in the united states, should be terminated.


the vast majority of families would appear for their removal proceedings with appropriate  orientation, case management services, supervision and community support.
parents with  children  should  receive  individual  custody  determinations  and  should  be  released  into  atd programs that reflect child welfare principles.


dhs-ice touted the discontinuance  of family detention at the t.
don hutto facility in 2009 as one of its signature detention  reform achievements.


unfortunately, it reversed course in 2014 and has rapidly built an  immense family detention infrastructure in an effort to expedite the removal of recently  arrived parents and children.
60 this strategy will not deter imperiled persons from seeking  58   ina 236(c).


59   ussc 2013, 5c1.
1 60    johnson,  jeh.


written  testimony  to  senate  committee  on  appropriations.
review  of  the   193  unlocking human dignityrefuge in the united states.


however, it will invariably lead to the return of de facto refugees  to  their  persecutors  in  violation  of  international  law.
family  detention  facilities  should  be closed and community-based supervision and support programs should be provided to  immigrant families, as necessary to ensure court appearances.


eighth,  dhs  may  need  to  hold  immigrants  during  processing,  intake,  initial  custody  determinations, and as a last resort for noncitizens who, even with the most restrictive  supervision  or  monitoring,  would  present  a  flight  risk  or  a  danger.
at  the  same  time,  the  effective  imprisonment  of  immigrants  during  the  adjudication  and  removal  process  cannot be justified.


the abas civil detention standards propose that dhs-ices physical  infrastructure  should  consist  of  facilities  akin  to  secure  nursing  homes,  residential  treatment facilities, domestic violence shelters, or in-patient psychiatric treatment facilities  (aba 2012, 4).
the aba standards further provide that civil facilities should have ample  common space, freedom to move within the facility, extended access to indoor and outdoor  recreation, and abundant opportunities to relate to other residents and to persons outside  the facility (ibid.


), and should approximate normal living conditions to the extent feasible  (ibid.
69).


detentionin the rare cases when it is necessaryshould occur in facilities  that are appropriate for persons in civil custody.
ninth, immigration judges should adjudicate cases now handled through administrative,  informal and non-court processes, and should make release and custody determinations  in all removal cases.


these responsibilitiesadded to an immense yearly workload and a  daunting backlog of nearly 450,000 caseswill require increases by an order of magnitude  in eoir funding and staffing.
thus, congress should substantially increase funding for  the us immigration court system in order to diminish case backlogs, permit the timely  adjudication of removal cases, obviate the need for detention and allow immigration judges  to adjudicate and review all removal cases.


as stated, the immigration court system receives only one-sixtieth of the funding of cbp  and ice.
in addition, the cost of right-sizing the immigration court system may well  be offset by reductions in dhs detention funding and diminished federal court expenses  related to reviewing habeas corpus petitions.


apart from funding considerations, there is strong moral need to create an adjudication  system  that  upholds  due  process  and  the  rule  of  law.
to  that  end,  all  unrepresented,  indigent persons in removal proceedings should be provided with legal representation at  the governments expense.


legal counsel is one of the most important determinants, even  more important than the strength of the underlying legal claim, in asylum and other case  outcomes (ramji-nogales, schoenholtz, and schrag 2007, 340).
for present purposes, it  substantially  increases  court  appearance  rates  (vera  2000,  41-2),  and  may  also  lead  to  decreased overall costs to the government due to reduced use of detention, more efficient  court proceedings and less frequent placement of the children of detainees in foster care  (montgomery 2014).


more importantly, legal representation is a fundamental attribute of  due process and contributes to the right decisions being made under the law.
61  presidents  emergency  supplemental  request.


113th  cong.
,  2nd  sess.


,  10  july  2014.
https://www.


hsdl.
org/?


abstract&did=755803.
61   to this end, the decision by the us department of health and human services to fund legal representation  for unaccompanied children deserves substantial praise.


194  journal on migration and human securityit will take time to transition from a system characterized by prisons, jails, and jail-like  facilities, to one characterized by supervised release, case-management and community- based  support  programs.
therefore,  the  federal  government  should  proceed  with  these  reforms with all deliberate haste.


