there and back again:  on  the diffusion of immigration  detention   michael flynn1 global detention project  executive summary  from mexico to the bahamas, mauritania to lebanon, turkey to saudi  arabia,  south  africa  to  indonesia,  malaysia  to  thailand,  immigration- related detention has become an established policy apparatus that counts  on dedicated facilities and burgeoning institutional bureaucracies.
until  relatively  recently,  however,  detention  appears  to  have  been  largely  an  ad hoc tool, employed mainly by wealthy states in exigent circumstances.


this  paper  uses  concepts  from  diffusion  theory  to  detail  the  history  of  key policy events in several important immigration destination countries  that led to the spreading of detention practices during the last 30 years  and  assesses  some  of  the  motives  that  appear  to  have  encouraged  this  phenomenon.
the paper also endeavors to place the united states at the  center of this story because its policy decisions appear to have played an  important role in encouraging the process of policy innovation, imitation,  and  imposition  that  has  helped  give  rise  to  todays  global  immigration  detention phenomenon.


nevertheless, many us offshore practices have not  received nearly the same attention as those of other important destination  countries.
more broadly, in telling this story, this paper seeks to flesh out  some of the larger policy implications of the externalization of immigration  control regimes.


just as offshore interdiction and detention schemes raise  important questions about custody, accountability, and sovereignty, they  should also spur questions over where responsibility for the wellbeing of  migrants begins and ends.
introduction in  october  2004,  the  u.


s.
s.


curtsa  guided-missile  frigate  armed  with  antisubmarine  warfare systems, torpedoes, and twin 76-millimeter cannonswas patrolling coastal areas  off  latin americas  pacific rim when  it spotted a suspicious-looking vessel  some 240  kilometers northeast of the galapagos islands and went to intercept (ros 2004).
in the  mid-1980s, the object of such pursuit would likely have been a soviet nuclear submarine.


1  the author would like to thank niels frenzen, mariette grange, izabella majcher, and david sylvan.
2014 by the center for migration studies of new york.


all rights reserved.
jmhs volume 2 number 3 (2014): 165-197after  the  end  of  the  cold  war,  however,  the  curts  role  in  us  security  underwent  a  dramatic metamorphosis.


instead of tracking deadly nuclear submarines, the frigate began  chasing down smuggling vessels.
in this case, the vessel the curts had in its sights was an  ecuadorian fishing boat that doubled as a migrant smuggling vessel.


packed into the ships  cargo hold were some 80 unauthorized migrants who were on the first leg of a harrowing  journey north that included a long ocean passage in a rickety smuggling boat, a perilous  border crossing in the region straddling mexico and guatemala, and uncertain treatment at  the hands of coyotes working the us-mexico border (ros 2004; flynn 2005b).
the curts operational transformation is part of a broader, global phenomenon involving  efforts by the worlds major industrialized democracies to blockor managemigrants  long  before  they  reach  their  intended  destinations.


sometimes  referred  to  as  remote  control by migration scholars,2 this process of expanding interdiction efforts has been a  key policy apparatus for a host of immigration destination countries for decades.
among  the more notable cases has been australia, whose notorious and recently-revived pacific  solution has involved interdicting migrant smuggling vessels on the high seas and confining  asylum seekers in offshore facilities located in nearby countries.


the european union  (eu) has stepped-up maritime interdiction patrols through the mechanism of its frontex  agency.
this has been accompanied by on-again-off-again plans to establish processing  centers for asylum seekers outside the borders of europe, as well as multiple efforts by  individual european countries to fund and support detention practices in neighboring non- eu countries.


while these european and australian endeavors have been the focus of heated debates  in scholarly and policy circles, the united states has been one of the worlds pioneers  in offshore interdiction and detention.
however, many of its activities have not received  nearly  the  same  scrutiny.


the  united  states  has:  used  military  bases  located  in  host  countries as staging grounds for migrant interdiction efforts (the curts routinely used the  now-closed  us  military base  in  manta,  ecuador);  funded  detention  centers  that  lacked  basic living conditions in places like guatemala city; used offshore detention facilities in  the caribbean long before australia began implementing the pacific solution; and teamed  up with law enforcement officials from other countries to carry out multi-lateral operations  aimed at apprehending migrant smugglers and shutting down clandestine migrant routes.
a shared quality of these extraterritorial efforts is their emphasis on detention, including  the establishment of offshore detention sites as well encouraging the emergence of new  detention institutions in neighboring countries.


during a three-decade period of outwardly- expanding  immigration  controls,  immigration-related  detentiondefined  by  the  global  detention project as the deprivation of liberty of non-citizens for reasons related to their  immigration status3has truly gone global.
from  mexico  to  the  bahamas,  mauritania  to  lebanon,  turkey  to  saudi arabia,  south  africa to indonesia, malaysia to thailand, immigration-related detention has become an   2  aristide zolberg initially developed the concept of remote control to characterize the emergence of visa  regimes, which enable states to regulate entrance to their territory before a persons arrival.


see zolberg 1999  and 2001.
3  global detention project, http://www.


globaldetentionproject.org/.
for an explanation of this definition, see  flynn 2012.


166  journal on migration and human securityestablished modus operandi that counts on dedicated facilities and burgeoning institutional  bureaucracies.
before the decade of the 1980s, however, detention appears to have been  largely an ad hoc tool, employed mainly by wealthy states in exigent circumstances and  typically made use of prisons, warehouses, hotel rooms, or other off-the-shelf facilities.


while  there  has  been  no  comprehensive  study  that  documents  immigration  detention  regimes globally to date,4 the reasons detention policies and practices matured and grew  in major detaining countries like france, the united kingdom, and the united states have  been widely discussed and researched.
5 less well known, however, is how this tool of  immigration control grew to have the worldwide dimensions it has today.


this paper seeks to address this gap.
it details the history of key policy events that led  to  the  spread  of  detention  practices  during  the  last  three  decades  in  three  far-flung  yet  interconnected  geographic  regions  of  the  worldthe  asia-pacific,  the  americas,  and  europeand assesses some of the factors that appear to have encouraged this outcome.


the  paper makes use of a range of source material, including evidence developed by the author  as a result of on-the-ground reporting in various countries, official histories, diplomatic  correspondence, parliamentary records, and previous studies.
using concepts developed  in the literature on policy diffusion, it shows how industrialized democracies learned from  each other the purported utility of detaining migrants and asylum seekers outside territorial  boundaries, and how this process eventually led to the emergence of new detention regimes  in a host of countries on their peripheries.


another objective of this paper is to focus attention on the role of the united states in this  process because its policy decisions (particularly during the 1980s and 1990s) appear to  have been instrumental in encouraging the process of policy innovation, imitation, andin  some casesimposition that has helped give rise to todays global immigration detention  phenomenon.
ultimately, these policies have, in some form or another, traversed the planet  and appear to be influencing the practices of some of the united states closest neighbors,  thus the title of this paper.


more broadly, in telling this story, this paper seeks to underscore how the extraterritorial  immigration control efforts of the worlds major liberal democracies have severely impacted  the ability of migrants and asylum seekers to enjoy basic human rights, and the variety of  motives that have helped spur these developments.
the diffusion framework in detailing the history of the spread of immigration detention, this paper employs concepts  that have been developed in the literature on diffusion, a theoretical framework used in  international studies to describe how policies transfer between countries.


scholars  have  advanced  a  number  of  models  to  capture  different  types  of  diffusion  phenomena.
according  to  one  definition,  policy  diffusion  is  a  process  through  which  communication regarding a policy in place in one country results in that policys adoption   4  the global detention project has published detention profiles on dozens of countries, which are available on  its website.


however, a comprehensive account of the global spread of this practice has yet to be undertaken.
5  see, for instance, silverman 2012, fischer 2011, and welch 2002.


167  the diffusion of immigration detention in another (wipfli 2007, 42).
drawing from everett rogers classic work on diffusion of  innovations, wipfli states that there are five main aspects of this definition: (1) a policy  innovation; (2) a communication process enabling states to share innovations; (3) channels  of communication, including global issue-networks and interstate meetings; (4) differing  periods  of  time  for  innovations  (citing  rogers  distinction  between  innovators,  early  adopters,  early  majority,  late  majority,  and  laggards);  and  (5)  social  systemssuch  as  states or any collection of interrelated unitswhere diffusion occurs.


this conceptualization of diffusion is intended to refer to a process of policy convergence  that  is  distinct  from  either  harmonizationlike  in  the  case  of  the  eu  directivesor  coercion resulting from power imbalances between states.
instead, it aims to capture the  spontaneous unplanned spread of new ideas, which occurs in the absence of formal or  contractual obligation, or external pressure (wipfli 2007, 20).


as  illustrated  repeatedly  in  this  paper,  this  narrowly  defined  concept  has  only  limited  application to global immigration detention.
while it can assist in explaining certain elements  that are part of the spread of immigration control practices, in particular its emphasis on  innovation and divergences in the timing of policy adoption, rogers framework is unable  to capture the variety of ways in which immigration detention practices have diffused.


for  instance, while there are some notable cases of policy imitation and spontaneous adoption  of detention practices, many instances of detention diffusion occur in a situation of power  imbalance or as a result of more formal policy harmonization processes.
other scholars have proposed a more detailed set of diffusion mechanisms.


weyland (2005),  for instance, explores four mechanisms: (1) rational learning; (2) symbolic or normative  imitation;  (3)  cognitive  heuristics;  and  (4)  external  pressure.
rational  learning  models  contend that policymakers adopt policies by searching for rational solutions to perceived  problems through comprehensive cost-benefit analysis of available policy models, leading  to policy convergence.


in contrast to rational actor models, states also enact policies for symbolic and normative  reasons by imitating their neighbors and trying to emulate perceived best practices in their  pursuit of international legitimacy, often times window-dressing their efforts instead of  making substantive changes.
guiraudon and lahav (2000) argue that states often seek to  circumvent normative constraints by seeking out burden-sharing arrangements and other  strategies that enable them to evade adhering to norms.


others have pointed to the ability of  states to selectively apply human rights, like incorporating norms related to the security of  migrantssuch as ensuring proper conditions of confinementwhile resisting arguments  regarding the need to employ detention only as a last resort (flynn 2013).
cognitive heuristics emphasizes that policymakers know their interests and wholeheartedly  embrace policies not just for window dressing.


however, according to this concept, such  actions do not necessarily coincide with the rational actor model whereby costs and benefits  are weighed based on comprehensive knowledge of possible solutions to social problems.
diffusion through external pressure can occur as a result of interstate relations and advocacy  from international organizations.


as discussed later in this paper, external pressure is an  obvious and well-trodden path by which immigration control policies have spread in recent   168  journal on migration and human securityyears, though there are a number of ways this notion can be refined to account for differing  experiences of diffusion.
weyland ultimately advances a cognitive-psychological framework, arguing that rational- choice  approaches  simplify  decision-making  whereas  cognitive  approaches  are  more  empirically grounded and are better equipped to explain decision-making in the absence of  an exhaustive cost-benefit analysis.


operating in a context of bounded rationality, decision- makers endeavor to find policy solutions in the absence of a comprehensive assessment of  either the problem or all its possible solutions.
weyland developed some of his arguments as part of an assessment of policy diffusion in  latin america, with a particular focus on the spread of pension schemes in that region.


however, a number of scholars have adapted similar concepts to explain the multitudinous  nature of the spreading of immigration control policies, particularly in the european sphere  where the evolution of internal freedom of movement in the eu has been accompanied by  increasing efforts to control the external borders of the region and to externalize control  efforts to third countries (karakayali and rigo 2010).
others have underscored that as part  of the process of expanding migration controls, states have employed a host of private  entities  and  international  organizations,  in  effect  diffusing  certain  aspects  of  migration  control to non-state actors (guiraudon and lahav 2000).


according to lahav and guiraudon, these various strategies can be arranged on a playing  field  that  runs  along  two  intersecting  axes:  public-private  and  domestic-international  (lahav  and  guiraudon  2000,  58).
thus,  for  example,  in  the  domestic  sphere,  we  find  some  states  delegating  responsibility  for  apprehending  migrants  to  local  police  forces  (public) and increasingly using for-profit companies (private) to run detention centers.


in  the international sphere, for instance, states pressure airlines (private) to verify whether  travelers have proper travel documentation and arrange with third-countries (public) to  manage migration movements (e.
g.


, by establishing readmission agreements).
it is in the last quadrantpublic internationalthat we observe the phenomenon of policy  diffusion relevant to the case of immigration detention.


in a study of the external dimension  of  eu  immigration  policy,  lavenex  and  uarer  (2004)  contend  that  there  are  various  avenues by which the eu effects external policy changes.
these include the unintended  externalities of eu policies on third countries, the purposeful export of common policies  through bilateral and/or multilateral agreements, and the extension of european policies to  third countries through institutionalized forms of cooperation (lavenex and uarer 2004,  418).


lavenex and uarer propose a conceptual model for explaining how immigration policies  diffuse internationally, which they term the policy transfer framework.
according to this  framework, there are four principal forms of policy adaptation and transfer: (1) unilateral  emulation, in which countries are cognitively motivated to adopt a policy they learned or  observed from another without any external pressure or coercion; (2) adaptation through  externality, which is a mix of voluntary and involuntary adaptation that occurs when a  state elects to adopt a specific policy in response to the impact of policies adopted by a  neighboring country; and (3 and 4) two types of policy transfer through conditionality,  which in the case of europe is a policy transfer that occurs at the insistence of the eu   169  the diffusion of immigration detention and where cooperation on a certain aspect of asylum and immigration policy is regulated  by a bilateral agreement between the eu and the third country.


one version of this form  of  policy  transfer,  (3)  opportune  conditionality,  occurs  when  one  country  insists  that  another adopt a policy, but such adoption is viewed by the adopting country as a welcome  development.
the  other  version,  (4) inopportune conditionality,  indicates  transfers  that  occur in a more authoritative manner, which usually implies significant costs to the third  country (lavenex and uarer 2004, 421).


according to lavenex and uarer, the broad  network of eu external agreements provides a powerful tool for binding third countries to  common eu policies, thereby extending the scope of the latter (ibid.
).


while weylands cognitive-psychological framework provides a valuable critique of the  shortcomings of rational-choice, the objective in this paper is not to advance a particular  theoretical framework.
rather, it aims to use basic explanatory models for underscoring the  diverse contexts in which the diffusion of immigration detention practices occur.


because  it is broadly conceptualized and particularly geared to explaining diffusion in the migration  context, lavenex and uarers framework is well equipped to achieve this task.
the origins of guantnamo  an  internal  history  of  the  us  immigration  and  naturalization  service  (ins)  recounts  how passage of the chinese exclusion act and other restrictionist measures in the 1880s  created a new federal function, immigration control, which led to the development of the  countrys first national immigration policy.


as the history illustrates, since its earliest days,  us immigration control has employed detention as a key tool:  operations began in new york harbor at a new federal immigration station on ellis  island, which opened january 2, 1892.
the largest and busiest station for decades, ellis  island housed inspection facilities, hearing and detention rooms, hospitals, cafeterias,  administrative offices, railroad ticket offices, and representatives of many immigrant  aid societies.


ellis island station also employed 119 of the immigration services entire  staff of 180 in 1893.
the service continued building additional immigrant stations at  other principal ports of entry through the early twentieth century.


(smith, n.
d.


)  thus was born what appears to be one of the worlds first immigration detention estates.
6  between then and now, the united states has experienced numerous periods during which  the issue of immigration has reached a fever pitch in public discourse, most recently in  the early 1980s, mid-1990s, and in the aftermath of the 9/11 attacks.


these successive  periods of collective societal alarmoften encouraged by elected officialshelped spur  not only stepped-up internal detention and deportation practices but also efforts to control  migration beyond us borders, resulting in the adoption of stepped-up detention practices  in neighboring countries.
the  modern  us  immigration  detention  estate  first  emerged  in  the  early  1980s,  when  6  it is worth noting that another facility from roughly the same era, the angel island immigration station in  the san francisco bay, acted more like a detention center than ellis island, where most people were detained  for only brief periods of time.


in contrast, angel island, which opened in 1910, detained numerous chinese  and other asian migrants for long periods of time.
170  journal on migration and human securitythe  reagan-era  immigration  and  naturalization  service  (ins)  began  systematically  apprehending  unauthorized  migrants  from  certain  countries  in  response  to  growing  migration  pressures  from  the  caribbean.


the  ins  opened  a  number  of  new  detention  centers in puerto rico and the us mainland to cope with the resulting surge in detainees  (frenzen 2010, 377).
according to welch, prior to the 1980s, the ins enforced a policy  of detaining only those individuals deemed likely to abscond or who posed a security risk  (2002, 107).


in  a  1985  us  supreme  court  case,  jean  v.
nelson,  the  court  overturned  a  mandatory  detention policy put in place in 1981 that strictly targeted haitian nationals.


according to  one migration scholar, to a large extent once the jean v.
nelson decision came down and  the reagan administration did not have the authority to detain only haitians, the current  detention system was born, i.


e.
detain all nationalities.


7  a year after this court ruling, in 1986, the government passed the immigration control and  reform act (irca), which combined the legalization of certain unauthorized immigrants  with stepped-up internal enforcement and control measures (dixon and gelatt 2005).
irca  marked a significant moment in the us approach to immigration by cementing enforcement  of immigration restrictions as a cornerstone of us policy.


according to a 2005 assessment,  overall  spending  on  enforcement  activities  has  ballooned  from  pre-irca  levels,  with appropriations growing from $1 billion to $4.
9 billion between fiscal years 1985  and  2002  and  staffing  levels  increasing  greatly.


resources  have  been  concentrated  heavily on border enforcement, particularly the border patrol.
spending for detention  and removal/intelligence activities multiplied most rapidly over this period, with an  increase in appropriations of over 750 percent.


(dixon and gelatt 2005)  the  increased  pressure  on  internal  enforcement  measures  helped  lead  to  a  number  of  innovations in us policy.
in particular, the need to quickly ramp up detention capacity was  exploited by prison privatization entrepreneurs and their supporters in congress to pressure  the ins to allocate funds in the mid-1980s for establishing the countrys first privately-run  immigration detention center.


8 since then, numerous other countries, particularly in the  anglophone world, have invited private prison companies to manage their immigration  detention facilities, raising important questions about everything from legal accountability  at detention centers to the social forces that may be involved in promoting growth in this  practice (flynn and cannon 2009).
9  this period also saw early efforts by the united states to extend enforcement measures   7  niels frenzen, e-mail correspondence with the author, march 26, 2014.


8  t.
don hutto co-founded with tom beasley and robert crants the corrections corporation of america  (cca) in 1983.


in 1984, cca opened the countrys first privately-run detention center using a former hotel  called the olympic motel.
this temporary facility, which according to cca was opened at the behest of the  ins, was replaced soon thereafter by the houston processing center, ccas first design, build and manage  contract  from  the  us  department  of  justice  for  the  bureau  of  immigration  and  customs  enforcement  (formerly the ins) in texas (cca, a quarter century of service to america, http://cca.com/our-history).


9  it is important to note that the united states was not the first case of privatization in the field of immigration  detention.
in the 1970s, the united kingdom delegated responsibilities to private contractors in detention  facilities based on the logic that the use of prison or police officers would be seen as too oppressive for non- prisoners (bacon 2005, 6).


171  the diffusion of immigration detention beyond its physical borders in order to deter asylum seekers and prevent alien smuggling.
this  process  eventually  led  to  the  establishment  of  one  of  the  worlds  first  offshore  immigration detention facilitieswhich is now privately-operated and called the migrant  operations centerat the us naval base in guantnamo bay, cuba.


the bases central  role in the history of immigration detention is of course today overshadowed by its more  notorious role as the detention site for alleged unlawful combatants apprehended as part  of the us war on terror.
10  helping spur these various developments in us immigration policies and practices were  large-scale migration events involving people from cuba and haiti starting in 1980.


in  april of that year, fidel castro announced that cuban americans could pick up friends and  relatives at the cuban port of mariel, which led to the creation of a freedom flotilla that  transported some 125,000 cubans to the united states within the first several months of  what later became known as the mariel boatlift.
in an effort to discredit the emigrants,  the castro government obliged boats to transport numerous convicted criminals, mental  health patients, and provocateurs.


this large migration of people was soon augmented by  one from haiti, which in 1980 saw its emigration rate shoot up 25 times the rate of the  1970s (welch 2002, 86).
the size of this migration phenomenon was not the only element that generated public  reaction.


the social characteristics of the people also seem to have played a role.
many  of the cubans who had fled to the united states after the revolution were white, educated  elites, whose emigration was encouraged by the united states.


in contrast, the mariels  were poorer and had been labeled criminals by both the cuban government and some us  officials.
these differences, together with significant increases in asylum seekers, provided  fertile terrain for immigration opponents.


at  the  same  time  that  immigration  authorities  were  busy  rounding  up  haitians  and  excludable  cubans  on  us  territory,  the  reagan  administration  began  a  policy  of  interdicting migrant boats in international waters.
in 1981, president ronald reagan issued  a presidential proclamation in which he suspended the entry of undocumented aliens  from  the  high  seas  because  it  had  become  detrimental  to  the  interests  of  the  united  states.


11  he subsequently ordered the coast guard to board foreign vessels in international  waters to determine whether passengers had documentation to enter the country (frenzen  2010).
while  the  united  states  officially  acknowledged  that  the  1951  convention  relating  to  the status of refugees prohibition against non-refoulement applied to people interdicted  during these operations, haitians were given summary asylum hearings on board coast  guard vessels that lasted only minutes.


the vast majority were then sent back to haiti   10  this effort to externalize immigration enforcement was grounded in a core aspect of us immigration law  that has become well-established through us case law, the plenary power doctrine.
this doctrine provides  congress full and plenary power over immigration enforcement.


the first us supreme court case to discuss  the forced detention of a non-citizen was chae chan ping, which concerned the detention of a chinese  laborer by a steam-ship captain who was trying to comply with the chinese exclusion act of 1882, which  provided an absolute moratorium on chinese labor immigration (chae chan ping v.
united states, 130 u.


s.
581 (1889)).


11  proclamation no.
4865, 46 fed.


reg.
48107 (september 29, 1981.


172  journal on migration and human securityunder an agreement the united states had established with the duvalier regime.
of the  estimated 23,000 haitians interdicted by the coast guard during this program, only eight  were judged to have bona fide asylum claims (estimate from cheryl little, cited in frenzen  2010,  380).


as  one  scholar  writes,  washington  wished  to  deal  with  haitian  migrants  outside us territory, since if they reached us shores they could often delay deportation  through  a  series  of  claims  within  the  us  administrative  and  courts  systems  (mitchell  2000, 87).
12 throughout their history, offshore interdiction and detention programs consistently provoke  thorny  questions  regarding  jurisdiction,  custody  and,  ultimately,  sovereignty  (see  also  adler-nissen and gammeltoft-hansen 2008).


these practices have also led to numerous  accusations that the united states and other wealthy destination countries are abetting the  mistreatment of migrants by supporting their detention in squalid and sometimes inhuman  conditions, and undermining obligations provided in treaties like the united nations (un)  refugee convention.
in the case of the 1980s us caribbean solution, a key issue raised by advocacy groups  was whether the summary asylum hearings on coast guard boats were adequate and non- discriminatory.


the government responded arguing that us courts did not have jurisdiction  to review the adequacy of the shipboard screening procedures  because the interdiction  and screening took place in international waters (frenzen 2010, 380).
in the 1985 case  haitian refugee center v.


gracey, a lower court ruled against the advocates, concluding  that the relevant laws only establish procedures guaranteed to aliens within the united  states.
because the interdicted haitians never reach the united states, these [laws] can  provide  no  relief  to  plaintiffs.


this  judgement  would  be  repeated  in  subsequent  cases  involving caribbean interdiction operations, including the 1993 supreme court case sale  v.
haitian centers council.


in 1992, president george h.
w.


bush issued a presidential  order that officially ended the previous policy of applying the refugee conventions article  33 non-refoulement norm in cases of people apprehended in international waters, thereby  freeing us authorities to summarily return migrants (frenzen 2010, 385).
in the early 1990s, a political and humanitarian crisis in haiti spurred by the overthrow  of president jean-bertrand aristide prompted a new large-scale migration to the united  states,  which  was  followed  in  1994  by  a  significant  upsurge  in  cuban  balseros.


this  time,  however,  the  united  states  faced  political  challenges  in  returning  the  interdicted  migrants because of the brutality of the cdras junta that had ousted president aristide.
while the united states sought out third countries to send haitians fleeing the violence including jamaica, the bahamas, the dominican republic, belize, venezuela, honduras,  and suriname (frenzen 2010)those intercepted were kept on the decks of coast guard  cutters, under jury-rigged tarpaulins to ward off sun and rain, writes mitchell (2000, 88).


conditions on the vessels quickly became unmanageable  and camps for the migrants  were hurriedly constructed at the nearest offshore us facility: the guantnamo bay  naval base in eastern cuba.
at other times, detained refugees were held on us bases  in panama, and on a hospital ship anchored in the harbor at kingston, jamaica.


(ibid.
)  according  to  the  congressional  research  service,  the  administration  of  george  h.


w.
12  for a summary of us policies toward haitian refugees, see kerwin 2012, 20.


173  the diffusion of immigration detention bush began using the guantnamo naval airbase to detain haitians in 1991.
it reports that  immigration and customs enforcement (ice) uses this migrant operations center to  hold no more than 20-40 people at a time (wasem 2009).


throughout the 1990s, guantnamo was a key element of the us response to boat migration  events.
in july 1994, for instance, as the us prepared to overthrow the military junta then  in power at port-au-prince, it began sending all interdicted haitians to guantnamo as  part of a new safe haven policy, ultimately detaining some 16,000 people there.


after the  overthrow of the junta, the united states gave the detainees that remained at the facility  the option of voluntarily returning and receiving $80 dollars or being forcibly repatriated  without payment (frenzen 2010, 384).
in addition to guantnamo, by the early 1990s, the united states had access to a network  of  offshore  processing  facilities  that  extended  from  the  bahamas  to  panama.


as  one  scholar  writes,  these  sites  presented  a  range  of  logistical  constraints  for  detainees,  and, importantly, the camps made it challenging for asylum seekers to access us asylum  procedures (magner 2004).
operation global reach running parallel to the situation in the caribbean were a number of other developments  and events in the early 1990s, which according to observers conspired to generate renewed  public alarm about immigration.


these included a stagnating economy, the 1993 bombing  of the world trade center, the 1995 bombing of the federal building in oklahoma city, and  several widely publicized immigration-related incidents.
one important event at the time  was the 1993 drowning of several undocumented migrants when the chinese smuggling  vessel transporting them, the golden venture, ran aground off queens, new york, spurring  widespread fears about growing chinese smuggling rings in the united states.


according to a new york times account,   the nightmarish, four-month journey of the golden venture began off the coast of  thailand and wound through the indian and atlantic oceans.
it ended on june 6, 1993,  when the freighter was ordered to run aground on the rockaway peninsula in queens  and the nearly 300 immigrants aboard were told to swim ashore in the early morning  darkness.


ten of the passengers drowned or died of hypothermia from the effort, which  required a long swim through rough waters because the ship ended up on a sandbar  200 yards offshore.
the immigrants, who had made various down payments to get  aboard, were to pay the rest of the $30,000 fee after their illegal arrivals in the united  states.


nearly all of those who made it to shore were quickly rounded up and many  spent up to three and a half years in american jails after their voyage.
(fried 1998)  public  officials  and  political  candidates  capitalizing  on,  and  sometimes  instigating,  a  resurgent  fear  over  immigration,  competed  over  who  could  develop  the  most  stringent  measures.


in states like california, public pressure to get tough on unauthorized immigration  from  mexico  eventually  led  to  passage  of  anti-immigrant  measures  that  denied  public  services to the unauthorized.
at the same time, the federal government began laying the  groundwork for a massive overhaul of its immigration policies and practices (nevins 2000).


174  journal on migration and human securityhelping to increase tensions were the negotiations between canada, mexico, and the united  states over the north american free trade agreement (nafta).
nafta presented the  us government with a seemingly intractable dilemma: how could the country open its  borders to the free transit of goods and servicesand yet keep out unwanted migrants?


in 1993, the clinton administration proposed a one-size-fits-all solution to the problem the country would build bigger and better walls.
the first target was el paso, texas, where  in 1993 the ins implemented operation hold the line, one of a series of border blockade  efforts that involved building walls along selected sections of the border, multiplying the  number of border guards, and deploying a fleet of jeeps, boats, and helicopters armed with  high-tech sensor equipment.


no longer would the country wait to detain migrants after  they crossed the border; instead, it would employ what the ins called territorial denial  and prevention thorough deterrence strategies meant to keep aliens from reaching us  territory (spencer 2000; nevins 2000).
in 1996, the clinton administration bolstered these border protection measures with two  laws that dramatically expanded the detention and deportation mandates of immigration  authoritiesincluding  a  dramatic  expansion  of  mandatory  detention  for  certain  groups  of  non-citizensthe antiterrorism  and  effective  death  penalty act  (aedpa)  and  the  illegal  immigrant  reform  and  immigrant  responsibility  act  (iirira).


according  to  most accounts, these two laws more than any other intervening eventthe 9/11 attacks  includedhave been instrumental in the ballooning of the us detention estate.
by 2009,  the countrys budgeted immigration-related detention capacity was 33,400, up from 27,500  in 2006 and 6,785 in 1994 (roberts 2009).


13  while these high-profile endeavors were drawing media and public attention, below the  radar the clinton administration was busy formulating a set of policies aimed at projecting  its prevention through deterrence strategy beyond the border.
in june 1993, president  william  j.


clinton  issued  presidential  decision  directive-9  (pdd-9).
prompted  in  part  by  the  rise  of asian  migrant-smuggling  syndicatesin  particular,  the  snakeheads,  a  notorious chinese smuggling outfit whose activities gained headlines in the aftermath of  the golden venture tragedypdd-9 directed a passel of government agencies to take the  necessary measures to preempt, interdict, and deter alien smuggling in the us.


we will  deal with the problem at its source, in transit, at our borders, and within the united states.
we will attempt to interdict and hold smuggled aliens as far as possible from the us border  and to repatriate them when appropriate.


14  the president outlined the responsibilities each government agency would shoulder:   justice and ins will be responsible for criminal enforcement and all us prosecutions  and  for  conducting  law  enforcement  operations  and  investigations  outside  the  us.
state  will  be  responsible  for  international  policy  and  relations  with  foreign   13   a  2013  report  published  by  the  migration  policy  institute  indicates  that  spending  on  immigration  enforcement has continued to skyrocket.


by 2012, the total budgets of immigration and customs enforcement  (ice) and the customs and border protection (cbp) was nearly $18 billion, more than the combined budgets  of all the other principal law enforcements agencies combined (meissner, et.
al 2013, 21).


14  clinton adminstration presidential decision directive pdd/nsc 9, alien smuggling (june 18, 1993).
http://fas.org/irp/offdocs/pdd/pdd-9.


pdf.
175  the diffusion of immigration detention governments  and  international  organizations.


transportation  and  coast  guard  will  be  responsible  for  interdiction  at  sea  with  appropriate support  by  defense.
the  director of central intelligence will be responsible for foreign intelligence in support  of interdiction efforts.


the border security working group will be responsible for  coordinating the interagency effort overall.
efforts at the source state will approach  source nations whose nationals, businesses, and/or infrastructure provide assistance to  alien smuggling and to develop common policies to prevent the departure of criminal- sponsored, non-refugee, and undocumented aliens.


15   various elements of this directive would later be crystallized in an ins-led initiative called  operation global reach.
global reach, launched in 1997, entailed an unprecedented  expansion  of  us  anti-smuggling  and  migrant  interception  activities.


according  to  a  2001 justice department fact sheet, global reach was a strategy of combating illegal  immigration through emphasis on overseas deterrence.
the ins established 40 overseas  offices with 150 us positions to provide a permanent presence of immigration officers  overseas,  trained  more  than  45,000  host-country  officials  and  airline  personnel  in  fraudulent document detection, and completed special operations to test various illegal  migrant deterrence methods in source and transit countries (doj 2001a).


during a 1997 news conference announcing the initiative, thenins commissioner doris  meissner argued that global reach was a necessary response to the growing problem of  alien smuggling:   let me be clear about the problem.
migrant trafficking is ruthless, and it has become  global.


these smuggling organizations will use any means whatsoever to produce  profits.
we have seen instances of mistreatment as well as cases of murder, rape, torture,  forgery, and extortion.


all too often, unwitting customers are forced into prostitution,  virtual bondage, or criminal activities.
(meissner et al 1997)  although  global  reach,  about  which  there  is  little  or  no  official  information  available  after 2003, was an international programvarious us agencies collaborated with officials  in  greece,  spain,  india, turkey,  thailand,  china, vietnam,  as  well  as  dozens  of  other  countriesits  greatest  impact  seems  to  have  been  in  latin  america.


as  the  primary  sources of unauthorized migration to the united states, as well as the principal regions  through which traffickers and migrants from across globe are funneled before reaching the  country, mexico and central america have long been a central focus of us cross-border  interdiction, even before global reach was initiated.
in 1996, the ins district office in mexico city began a series of intelligence and anti- smuggling operations called operation disrupt, which targeted migration and smuggling  activities in the dominican republic, costa rica, ecuador, honduras, and canada.


in a  1997  testimony  before  the  house  subcommittee  on  immigration  and  claims,  george  regan, then-ins acting associate commissioner, claimed that as part of disrupt, ins had  undertaken joint operations with foreign counterparts to break up several latin american  and chinese smuggling organizations.
16  15  ibid.


16   testimony  of  george  regan,  acting  associate  commissioner,  enforcement,  immigration  and  naturalization service, in us congress, house committee on the judiciary, subcommittee on immigration   176  journal on migration and human securityin 1997, after disrupt activities became a part of the overall global reach initiative, the  ins significantly broadened the scope of its latin american activities, undertaking annual  multilateral interception operations with law enforcement personnel from dozens of latin  american countries.
according to rights advocates in these countries, during the operations,  us immigration authorities served as advisors and provided funding to detain and deport  those apprehended (usccb 2000).


in a series of yearly press statements in the late 1990s and early 2000s, the agency proudly  announced  the  results  of  each  operation.
in  2000,  for  example,  the  ins  declared  that  years disrupt operation, forerunner, to be the largest anti-smuggling operation ever  conducted in the western hemisphere.


involving agents from six latin america countries,  the operation nabbed 3,500 migrants and 38 smugglers (doj 2000).
forerunner  was  followed  in  2001  by  crossroads  international,  which  the  ins  again  described  as  the  largest  multinational  anti-smuggling  operation  ever  conducted  in  the  western hemisphere, this one resulting in the arrest of 75 smugglers and the interdiction  of some 8,000 migrants from 39 countries.


according to a press statement, the wide- ranging anti-smuggling operation was directed by the ins mexico city district office and  involved .
.


.
law enforcement officers in columbia, costa rica, the dominican republic,  ecuador, el salvador, guatemala, haiti, honduras, jamaica, mexico, panama, and peru  (doj 2001b).


officials in countries participating in the us-led anti-smuggling operations often received  us budgetary assistance to help detain and deport migrants.
in 2000, for example, the us  catholic conference of bishops (usccb), which had sent a delegation to central america  to study regional migration issues, issued a scathing press release decrying us interdiction  activities in the region (usccb 2000).


as part of the trip, the conference representatives  visited a prison in tegucigalpa, honduras, that was filled with migrants who had been  detained during operation forerunner.
the press release noted that while operations were  purportedly  targeted  at  smugglers,  they  resulted  in  thousands  of  migrants  being  placed  in substandard prisons in the region without representation or the opportunity to apply  for asylum.


it added that the us officials were intimately involved in these interdiction  efforts, offering teams of advisors to the central american governments and paying for  the return of extra-regional migrants to their homes.
one us official told the conference  representatives, it is less expensive to take care of the problem here than when they reach  the united states (ibid.


).
in another case from 2001, kanu patel, a migrant from india who had paid thousands of  dollars to be smuggled halfway across the globe to the united states, was arrested in mexico  along with dozens of his compatriots as they approached the us border (miami herald  2001).


under pressure from the united states to toughen its stance on illegal migration,  mexico deported the migrants to guatemala, where they were placed in a squalid detention  center  that  received  funding  through  the  us  embassy.
after  spending  eight  months  in  detention and being repeatedly denied medical attention for cardiac pains, patel committed  suicide (miami herald 2001; flynn 2002).


an investigative report published by this author at the time established that the facility at  and claims, combating illegal immigration: progress report, 105th cong.
,1st sess.


, apr.
23, 1997.


177  the diffusion of immigration detention which patel had been detained was one of two facilities that had received funding through the  us embassy in guatemala city in direct response to a request from guatemalan authorities,  who complained that anti-smuggling operations were overwhelming their capacities (flynn  2002).
in an interview, a guatemalan immigrant-rights advocate described the two us- funded detention centers, which were closed shortly after patels suicide, stating that after  operation disrupt in 2001, the centers were filled with people from everywherefrom  ecuador,  india,  peru,  syria,  cuba.


in  one  space  there  were  40  people.
everything  was  being destroyed, there was no light, no air.


they were worse than our jails (flynn 2002).
in response to inquiries about whether us officials had bothered to check on the facilities  they were funding, a us embassy spokesperson claimed she did not know and referred  questions to the ins regional office in mexico city.


the director of this office said that us  officials did eventually visit, and they determined that the facilities guatemala was using  were not acceptable.
guatemala is now looking at another location to build a new detention  center, which will be almost like a model for central america.


.
.


.
i sent my deputy director  to check it out because we are greatly concerned (flynn 2002).


this evolution of guatemalan detention efforts appears to reflect two of the diffusion models  advanced by lavenex and uarer.
on the one hand, we can observe policy transfer through  conditionality insofar as the multi-lateral anti-smuggling operation in which guatemala  participated appears to have been undertaken at the instigation of the united states.


at  the same time, however, us efforts to effectively push out its border controls resulted in a  situationa dramatic increase in the numbers of third-country nationals in custodythat  forced guatemalan authorities to adopt new detention strategies, including using hastily  prepared ad hoc facilities and requesting funds to operate them.
such a situation appears to  track closely with the notion of adaptation through externality, or a mix of voluntary and  involuntary adjustments that occur when a state elects to pursue a policy in response to the  impact of policies adopted by another country.


in other cases of us offshore interdiction from this period, the overriding issues are less  concerned with diffusion processes than they are about the deployment of innovative and at times apparently misleadingtactics to overcome the constraints of custody and  sovereignty  that  arise  when  operating  outside  national  boundaries.
one  notable  case  occurred in 2002, when the us navy interdicted an ecuadorian vessel, the san jacinto,  off the coast of guatemala and towed it to southern mexico, where the 270 migrants on  board were briefly questioned and then repatriated.


although nominally in the custody of  mexican officials, the five alleged smugglers, identified by passengers as the crew, were  questioned by ins officials, who, somewhat remarkably given their location at the time,  advised them of their rights under the us constitution.
although the crew had little or no  understanding of us laws, the ins officials asked them if they would waive their miranda  rights, which they did (flynn 2003 and 2005b).


according to court documents filed in federal court in washington, dc, ins officials then  contacted the justice department about the case, and the decision was made to file an arrest  warrant against the crew.
according to one document from the us attorneys office, after  being expelled from mexico, the defendants were arrested in houston, where their flight  landed, and taken into custody by federal authorities (flynn 2005b).


the documents fail to explain how the crew ended up on that flight, or whether they had   178  journal on migration and human securityany idea they were heading to the united states.
according to an attorney who represented  the crewmembers, when they boarded their flight in mexico, their understanding was  that they were going to ecuador (flynn 2005b).


in an interview with this author, a us  immigration official in ecuador solved the mystery, explaining that mexico would be the  country that deported [the crew], and if they choose to deport them by way of the united  states, where the plane has a layover, what can we do about it?
(flynn 2005b).


while the coast guard, with support from the us navy, has long been a key player in the  caribbean, its national security mandate was expanded in the early 1990s as the result of  a succession of presidential decrees.
in testimony before congress in 1999, coast guard  captain anthony s.


tangemon described the orders:   president [george h.
w.


] bush issued [executive order] 12807 in 1992, directing the  secretary  of transportation  to  issue  appropriate  instructions  to  the  coast  guard  to  enforce the suspension of the entry of undocumented aliens into the us by sea and to  interdict the vessels carrying them.
president [bill] clinton issued pdd-9 [presidential  decision directive-9] in june 1993, directing the coast guard and other federal law  enforcement agencies to cooperate in the suppression of alien smuggling.


17  one outcome of these orders was stepped-up enforcement efforts in the pacific ocean.
in the late 1990s, the united states apprehended thousands of chinese migrants during  interdiction patrols in the western pacific.


the migrants were subsequently sent to guam,  midway island, and the northern mariana islands for processing (frenzen 2010).
as  the  san  jacinto  case  illustrates,  the  us  coast  guard  also  extended  its  interdiction  efforts to the southern pacific coast of the americas at this time, which was experiencing  significant upsurges in the number of chinese and ecuadorian smuggling vessels.


although  the principal mission of the patrols has been to search for illegal narcotics trafficking, the  coast guard (sometimes with the support of the us navy or its counterparts in mexico)  regularly intercepts migrant smuggling boats, often for legitimate humanitarian purposes.
most  of  the  vessels  do  not  have  the  proper  conditions  to  transport  migrants  and  lack  emergency equipment (thompson and ochoa 2004).


interdicted migrants have been sent  to detention facilities in the southern mexican city of tapachula and to guatemala city to  await deportation (flynn 2002).
for several years, the coast guards efforts in the pacific were bolstered by the operation  of surveillance planes flying out of a now-shuddered us military base in manta, ecuador.


the  base,  which  became  a  lightning  rod  for  criticism  of  us  actions  and  intentions  in  latin america, is widely believed to have played a key role in efforts to detain unwanted  migration at its source (finley 2004).
us ships operating out of manta detained thousands  of  unauthorized  migrants  heading  north  and  destroyed  suspected  smuggling  vessels  in  ecuadorian waters, a practice that was loudly decried in that country and was the subject  of an ecuadorian congressional investigation (flynn 2005b).


furor over us interdiction efforts in the region erupted in october 2004 after the u.
s.


s  curts  intercepted  an  ecuadorian  fishing  vessel  carrying  some  80  migrants  240  miles   17  testimony of anthony s.
tangemon before the subcommittee on immigration and claims, us house of  representatives, may 18, 1999.


179  the diffusion of immigration detention northeast of the galapagos islands.
when the migrants arrived in manta, they immediately  denounced the abuses they had suffered at the hands of us sailors who, they said, had  mistreated several detainees in an effort to identify the crew.


one of the detainees told  reporters that sailors had beaten a polio victim with an iron bar because he didnt get up  fast enough (ros 2004).
us  coast  guard  interdiction  efforts  peaked  in  the  mid-2000s,  with  detention  numbers  reaching some 10,000 per year during 2004-2005.


the numbers tailed off during the final  years of the bush presidency, a trend that continued after the election of president barack  obama.
in 2011, the coast guard reported interdicting 2,474 migrants, followed by 2,955  in 2012, and 2,094 in 2013 (uscg 2014).


although the manta base was shuttered in 2009 and interdiction numbers have tapered  off  in  recent  years,  the  obama  administration  has  continued  to  pursue  extraterritorial  strategies, including providing support for detention practices in neighboring countries.
in september 2010, for example, the us embassy in the bahamas reported that united  states northern command co-sponsored a tour with the embassy of the krome service  processing and detention center in florida by members of the royal bahamas defence  force  commando  squadron  in  order  to  discuss  best  practices  in  immigration  facility  detention management.


according to the embassy press release, the krome visit was the  second in a series of exchanges on detainee operations funded by usnorthcom (us  embassy nassau 2010).
more recently, in december 2011, panamanian officials announced that the united states,  columbia, and panama were jointly opening a new training center in the central american  country that would have as one of its objectives training security personnel on how to  combat the smuggling of unauthorized migrants in the region (prensa latina 2011).


the  announcement followed the opening in panama earlier that year of a central american  center of regional security information (sica), which receives logistical support from  us southern commands joint inter agency task force-south.
the center, which includes  personnel  from  the  militaries  and  police  forces  of  all  countries  in  central america,  is  located at the former us howard air base.


among its primary goals, alongside fighting  narco-trafficking, is to combat human smuggling in the region (el nuevo diario 2011).
the pacific solution and beyond although many us externalization efforts have remained largely off the media and scholarly  radars, the countrys activities in the caribbean, including the use of guantnamo as an  offshore detention site, have served as important exemplars for other countries seeking  ways to export their border controls.


in particular, in the early 2000s, australian parliamentary records reveal that officials in  that country specifically cited us detention operations at guantnamo, as well as at the  mariana islands and midway, when proposing the pacific solution aimed at interdicting  vessels before they reached national waters and detaining asylum seekers and unauthorized  migrants in offshore facilities located in nauru and papua new guinea.
the seeds of this policy appear to have been sown in the early 1990s, when a labor-led   180  journal on migration and human securitygovernment introduced the policy of mandatory detention of unlawful immigrants with  passage of the 1992 migration amendment act.


the policy was spurred by public concern  about mounting numbers of unauthorized boat arrivals, which the government argued were  undermining the countrys ability to protect its borders (stevens 2002).
the amendment  made  detention  mandatory  for  all  unauthorized  boat  arrivals.


the  maximum  length  of  detention was increased to nine months, but could be prolonged indefinitely due to legal  procedures and appeals (stevens 2002).
the law also established that detainees could only  be freed if they were removed from the country or granted a visa, leaving no room for  alternative arrangements such as bail (amnesty international 2005).


to accommodate the  resulting  increases  in  the  detainee  population,  additional  immigration  detention  centers  were established in remote areas of australia, with heightened security (stevens 2002).
the  real  impact  of  this  policy  was  not  feltexcept,  of  course,  amongst  the  detainees  themselvesuntil the late 1990s, when australia began experiencing new increases in the  number of asylum seekers and unauthorized migrants from the middle east and central  asia  being  smuggled  into  the  country  through  indonesia.


although  the  total  numbers  of  people  remained  relatively  smallless  than  4,000  annuallythe  situation  became  politically  charged  as  the  government  ran  into  a  number  of  well  publicized  difficulties  trying to process and remove the migrants, which resulted in entire families being held for  years in highly restrictive detention conditions (amnesty international 2005).
as the australian government came under increasing international criticism for its mandatory  and indefinite detention policies, officials began looking for alternative strategies to limit  the countrys exposure to boat people.


on august 26, 2001, authorities were presented  with an ideal case to deploy these strategies when surveillance flights detected a suspicious  fishing vessel off the coast of christmas island.
a bills digest from a september 2001  australian parliament debate recounts the ensuing events:   the vessel was carrying 433 potential asylum seekers [from afghanistan] en route  to australia before it broke down.


the following day australian search and rescue  (aussar) broadcast a call to any merchant ships in the vicinity to render assistance  to  the  stricken  vessel.
a  norwegian  freighter,  the  tampa,  responded  to  the  call,  intercepting the vessel and bringing its passengers aboard.


the master of the tampa,  captain arne rinnan, had intended to take the rescuees to a port in indonesia but was  requested by the passengers to proceed to christmas island.
before the tampa reached  australias territorial waters it was instructed to remain in the contiguous zone.


on  28 august the tampa issued a distress signal based on the fact that assistance had not  been provided within 48 hours.
on 29 august it proceeded into the territorial waters  surrounding christmas island and was interdicted by 45 sas members.


the same day  the government introduced border protection legislation into parliament.
18  the legislation tabled by the government proposed allowing australian officers to detain using reasonable force if necessaryany ship in the territorial sea and to force the ship  to be taken outside the territory.


the legislation also proposed making such actions not  reviewable by the courts because of concerns, as the digest states, that the rescuees might  18   bills  digest  no.
62  2001-02:  border  protection  (validation  and  enforcement  powers)  bill  2001.


parliamentary  library,  parliament  of  australia.
http://www.


aph.gov.
au/parliamentary_business/bills_ legislation/bd/bd0102/02bd062.


181  the diffusion of immigration detention have access to protection visas and the judicial review system (ibid.
).


the initial bill was  rejected  by  the  senate.
additionally,  the  decision  to  force  the  detention  of  the  asylum  seekers on board the tampa, where they had remained after the sas took control of the  tampa, was found to be unlawful by a federal court.


one month after the incident, in september 2001, the australian government successfully  introduced the pacific solution, a set of legislative changes that allowed for the detention  of  unauthorized  migrants  on  the  island  nations  of  papua  new  guinea  and  nauru.
the  1958  migration  act  was  revised  to  exclude  ashmore  reef,  cartier  island,  christmas  island, cocos (keeling) islands, and other territories external to australia, creating excised  offshore places.


thereafter, people who entered these territories were taken to detention  and processing centers in nauru or papua new guineas manus island.
as the migrants  had not officially entered australia, they were denied access to australian legal protection  (bailliet 2003).


the parliamentary digest describing these proposals makes clear the source of inspiration  for this australian solution.
in a section titled united states analogy, the digest recounts  various policies pursued by successive us administrations to combat people smuggling,  highlighting in particular directives to interdict suspected smuggling vessels in the high  seas,  including  president  clintons  directive  providing  for  the  offshore  processing  of  illegal immigrants.


the digest then states how in the united states,   [t]here is a distinction between illegal immigrants who are interdicted offshore and  those who apply within the territory of the united states.
the distinction is between  immigrants who are seeking admission and those who are in and admitted to the united  states.


illegal immigrants who are interdicted offshore are taken to a third country  or a united states trust territory for processing.
these places include guantnamo in  cuba, the mariana islands and midway, but not guam or the virgin islands which form  part of the united states.


as of 1998, the united states was negotiating with mexico  to reach an agreement allowing assessment within mexican waters and repatriation via  mexico.
it is difficult to get accurate information on agreements between the united  states and processing countries or countries of origin.


however, it is understood that  in  several  cases,  jurisdiction  over  foreign  ships  in  international  waters  has  been  exercised  under  the  safety  of  life  at  sea  (solas)  regulations  established  by  the  international  maritime  organisation.
otherwise,  jurisdiction  has  been  obtained  by  consent in individual cases.


19   the process of policy emulation that we observe in the australian case appears to reflect  numerous diffusion concepts described earlier in this paper, including wipfis spontaneous  unplanned spread of new ideas, which occurs in the absence of formal or contractual  obligation, or external pressure; weylands cognitive-psychological framework, in which  policymakers, operating in a context of bounded rationality, seek policy solutions in the  absence  of  a  comprehensive  cost-benefit  analysis  of  all  possible  solutions  to  a  rapidly  evolving situation; and lavenex and uarers unilateral emulation, in which states are  cognitively motivated to adopt a policy they learned or observed from another absent  any external pressure.
19  ibid.


182  journal on migration and human securitynevertheless, while the pacific solution became the focus of national and international  human  rights  campaignsamnesty  international,  for  instance,  filed  complaints  against  australia with the un high commissioner for refugees (unhcr) and the un committee  against torture, claiming that refugees rights were being jeopardizedthe us practices  that  australia  sought  to  emulate  never  received  similar  attention  internationally.
the  australian public largely supported the new policies, re-electing the conservative howard  government, which proclaimed victory over a foreign invasion (baillet 2003).


although a labor-led administration decided to close the countrys offshore facilities in  nauru and papua new guinea in 2008 (bbc news 2008; unhcr 2008), the policy was  revived in 2012 with multi-party backing.
the revival of the pacific solution came after  years of pursuing related offshore schemes in other nearby countries.


for example, since the  early 2000s, australia has worked with the international organization for migration (iom)  and the indonesian government to accommodate migrants interdicted by indonesia en  route to australia.
this program, which has been funded by australia, reportedly conforms  to the indonesian practice of generally allowing asylum seekers to be housed in non-secure  facilities (taylor 2010).


however, in 2007, the iom launched a complementary australian-funded initiative called  management and care of irregular migrants project, which has had three core aims:  boosting  the  capacity  of  indonesias  main  detention  centers;  developing  a  manual  of  standard operating procedures for detention operations; and providing training to officials  involved  in  overseeing  the  voluntary  return  of  detainees  to  their  countries  of  origin  (taylor 2010).
according to one australian scholar who has investigated the situation in  indonesia, the australian funded increase in indonesian immigration detention capacity  has been matched by an increased tendency on the part of the indonesian government to  detain asylum seekers (taylor 2010).


a 2009 investigation by an australian lawyer-journalist team reported similar concerns,  stating:   there is growing concern about the volume of asylum seekers flowing into indonesia  from afghanistan,  iraq,  sri  lanka  and  burma  (in  particular).
until  recently,  there  had been an almost total media blackout on the subject, but information has seeped  through, confirming that australia is involved in the practice of warehousing asylum  seekers  (including  children  and  babies)  in  indonesia,  and  that  taxpayers  money  is  being used to facilitate this practice.


(taylor 2009)  australias efforts to boost the detention capacities of countries on its periphery, particularly  in indonesia, are strikingly similar to us efforts in central america and the caribbean.
in effect, we see a core destination country adopting policies that ultimately impact the  situations of upstream countries, which respond by deploying practices promoted by the  destination country.


in this instance of adaptation through externality, however, we can  observe  another  important  aspect  of  the  diffusion  phenomenon  described  by  scholars,  notably  weylands  and  guiraudon  and  lahavs  emphasis  on  the  role  that  international  actors (in this case iom) play in promoting policy objectives.
australias offshore practices have paralleled those of the united states in another important   183  the diffusion of immigration detention way  as  well.


as  its  policies  of  offshore  interdiction  and  mandatory  detention  failed  to  provide the desired deterrent impact, canberra deployed a series of innovative strategies  beginning in 2010-2011, when a labor-led government endeavored to make agreements  with  east timor  and  malaysia  for  establishing  asylum  seeker  processing  facilities  that  would confine migrants apprehended by australia while their claims were processed by  unhcr.
while the east timor proposal was quickly abandoned, the so-called malaysian  solutionwhich  involved  swapping  several  hundred  unauthorized  arrivals  in australia  for several thousand refugees in malaysia who had already received statusbecame the  subject of heated debate, both nationally and internationally.


it was ultimately rejected by  australias high court in the 2011 case plaintiff m70/2011 v.
minister for immigration and  citizenship.


the m70 decision was an important catalyst, as one scholar puts in, for the revival of  the pacific solution (constand 2013).
the high court in effect found that the agreement  with malaysia was contrary to domestic law because the australian government could not  guarantee that asylum seekers sent to malaysia would be afforded effective protection,  which  undermined  australias  offshore  processing  efforts.


the  australian  parliament  responded  by  adopting  the  migration amendment act  2012,  an  objective  of  which  is  to ensure that the government retains its ability to implement certain offshore processing  arrangements, which it is currently pursuing with nauru and papua new guinea (constand  2013).
the amendment removed the requirement provided under previous law that a state  must provide basic refugee protections to be designated a regional processing country.


instead,  it empowered the australian government to make such designation whenever the  countrys immigration minister thinks that it is in the national interest to do so (constand  2013).
as it encountered with previous offshore processing efforts, australias revived pacific  solution  has  raised  a  number  of  unsettling  questions  not  only  about  the  countrys  commitment to the 1951 refugee convention, but also about jurisdictional authority at  offshore detention sites, legal accountability, and national sovereignty.


according to one  observer, writing in the sunday morning herald, successive governments have struggled  to explain what responsibility australia bears for asylum seekers detained in camps run and  paid for by australia but operating in the legal jurisdiction of other nations (flitton 2014).
these questions  came to  a  head in february  2014  when  asylum seekers  held at  papua  new guineas manus island offshore detention center rioted against their confinement.


the ensuing violence between detainees and security personnel resulted in the death of an  iranian asylum seeker who was allegedly beaten to death by locals.
severely complicating  matters was the fact that the killing purportedly occurred in the presence of private guards  from g4s, the company hired by australia to provide security at the facility.


one expert  quipped that if it were government officials that had been involved in the incident instead  of a private contractor, there would be a much easier case of legal responsibility.
the  fact that [the manus island facility] is simultaneously located offshore and subject to this  unclear memorandum of understanding [with the papua new guinea government], means  that  the  legal  assessment  is  much  more  complicated  (gammeltoft-hansen  quoted  in  siegfriend 2014).


184  journal on migration and human security fortress europe transit states and other developing nations on the periphery of australias geographical  sphere of influence are not the only countries that have been impacted by the detention  and interdiction policies pursued by canberra.
canadian officials, for instance, have cited  australias response to unauthorized boat arrivals in their discussions on how to handle such  arrivals at their ports, and there are reports of canadian officials touring australian detention  centers  (bradimore  and  bauder  2011;  cic  2010).


20  likewise,  in  a  clear  demonstration  of how detention and interdiction practices diffuse between peer countries, new zealand  officials subsequently cited both canadian and australian responses to unauthorized boat  arrivals to press for harsher detention policies, including the use of offshore processing  facilities for mass boat arrivals.
said new zealand prime minister john key in 2010,  if they can get to canada they can get to new zealand so we are looking at our own  legislation and our response to this issue (vance 2010).


despite the fact that it has never had such a boat arrival in its modern history, new zealand  amended its immigration legislation in 2013 to allow for mandatory, indefinite detention  of people apprehended as part of mass arrivals and finalized an agreement with canberra  that  includes  the  possibility  of  using australias  offshore  facilities  for  processing  these  maritime arrivals (see gdp 2014c).
however, it is in europe where australian solutions appear to have made their greatest  impact outside the asia pacific region.


while the borders within europe have become more  open, european governments have agreed to a number of external border control policies  aimed at stopping migrants and asylum seekers before they enter the european union,  leading to the creation of what some observers call fortress europe.
the phenomenon of the externalization of detention in the eu sphere contrasts with the  remote control practices we have seen in the united states and australia, in particular  because the process of shifting practices and pressures to the exterior involves negotiations  with governments from both in and outside the union.


broadly, one can characterize the  externalization of detention in the european region as an interlocking chain of diffusion  processes whereby detention pressures and practices are exported from main migration  destination countries to the periphery of the eu and beyond.
policy developments at the  20   canada  in  fact  has  a  long  history  of  involvement  in  controversial  extraterritorial  interdiction  and  refoulement practices, although there appears to be little documentation of such cases.


writes aiken (2001):  one of the rare, documented cases of such refoulement occurred in 1998.
canadian government officials  participated in the interception of a boat in the territorial waters of senegal which was carrying one hundred  and ninety two tamil asylum seekers from sri lanka.


one of the young men on the vessel, thambirasa  kamalathasan, describes being detained on the boat and told that he would not be given food or water until he  signed a document stating that he agreed to voluntarily return to sri lanka.
none of the authorities involved  in the interception, including representatives of the canadian and american governments as well as staff  with the international organization for migration, afforded kamalathasan an opportunity to explain that he  had been arrested by sri lankan police on several occasions in the past few years, mistreated in detention,  but always released without charge.


no one gave him an opportunity to explain his fears concerning the  prospect of return to sri lanka.
upon return to sri lanka, the tamils were arrested and held in detention for  up to five weeks.


several weeks after his release, kamalathasan was re-arrested by the police on the pretext  of  a  terrorism  investigation  and  subjected  to  severe  torture.
in  the  only  public  acknowledgement  of  this  interdiction almost a full year later, a canadian government spokesman described the action as a success in  safeguarding the country from illegal economic migrants.


185  the diffusion of immigration detention regional level and among major destination countries place pressures on eu border states  to  serve  as  gatekeepers  for  europe  and  bolster  their  detention  activities.
in  turn,  these  border countries and their eu partners (often working with international organizations like  the iom) diffuse detention pressures outward to their non-european neighbors.


this occurs  both directly, by funding detention efforts and negotiating agreements that include or imply  stepped-up detention activities (policy transfer through conditionality); and indirectly, by  hardening  their  borders  and  leaving  neighboring  countries  the  task  of  accommodating  increasing  numbers  of  unauthorized  migrants  and  asylum  seekers  (adaptation  through  externality).
agreements reached at the eu level have served as key vehicles for diffusing detention  pressures  and  practices  to  border  countries  within  europe.


one  notable  policy  in  this  regard is the dublin ii regulation (recently modestly modified and redubbed dublin iii),  which establishes a process for determining the member state responsible for examining  an asylum application.
this policy has resulted in many asylum seekers being deported, or  transferred, to periphery eu states.


as detention burdens have shifted to border states, the  eu has stepped in to help boost some of these countries detention capacities, particularly  in greece (see, gdp 2014a).
externalization to non-eu countries includes both direct and indirect processes.


indirectly,  eu countries have used a number of mechanisms that shift migratory burdens to neighboring  countries, which spur these countries to boost their own controls.
one approach has been  to negotiate readmission agreements with non-eu countries, which oblige these countries  to accept not only their own nationals but also third-country nationals in exchange for  compensatory measures like visa facilitation programs.


in december 2013, for example,  the eu finalized such an agreement with turkey, according to which ankara will have to  readmit its own citizens as well as third-country nationals who enter the eu directly from  turkey.
during  2011  alone,  the  eu  reported  that  nearly  56,000  third-country  nationals  entered or attempted to enter the eu by way of turkey (gder 2013).


if turkey follows  established practice in other countries that have readmission agreements with the eu, like  ukraine, many of the readmitted people will be placed in detention.
this is particularly  significant in the case of turkey as it retains a geographical limitation clause that restricts  the countrys refugee protection regime to asylum seekers and refugees from europe (see  gdp 2014b).


another key indirect mechanism has been to harden the external borders of europe, which  has forced countries that border europe to develop new responses, like increased detention  activities, to confront changing migration patterns.
intensified policing of the eu border  began in earnest during the lead-up to the eus expansion to 25 member states in 2004,  which extended its borders farther east.


eu governments spent lavishly on training programs  aimed at increasing the border policing capacities of the newest member states, in the hope  of addressing criminal activity there and clamping down on unauthorized migration (flynn  2006).
to coordinate a joint response, the european commission created a new border  security agency called frontex, which went into operation in may 2005 on the strength of a  9 million euro budget.


during the agencys june 2005 inauguration event, franco frattini,  then  european  commissioner  for  justice,  freedom,  and  security,  said  that  cooperation  on border policing was necessary to address an array of security problems, including the   186  journal on migration and human securityspecter of international terrorism, the human tragedies of victims of trafficking, and the  equally sad and grave consequences of illegal immigration into the eu (frattini 2005).
with frontex serving as coordinator, european maritime forces participate in joint patrols  along the mediterranean and west african coasts, and undertake targeted operations, like  deploying  rapid  border  intervention  teams  (rabits)  to  perceived  vulnerable  border  areas, including most notoriously the 2010 rabit deployment to greeces land border  with turkey, which rights groups claim led to serious violations of human rights (guild  and carrera 2010; human rights watch 2010).


describing the operation, human rights  watch reported:  in early november, frontex, the eus border agency, deployed a 175-member rapid  border intervention team (rabit) for the first time in its five-year history.
equipped  with  high-tech  detection  equipment,  a  helicopter,  dogs,  and  vehicles,  rabit  has  assisted greek authorities in trying to stop the migrant flow into greece.


(hrw 2010) as migratory patterns have changed in response to hardening eu borders, so too have  detention practices, often with unpredictable consequences.
in some instances, countries  that had previously not experienced significant migratory events have found themselves  forced to cope with large numbers of migrants.


they have also found themselves under  pressure  from  europe  to  interdict  migrants  and  asylum  seekers  (adaption  through  externality)a  phenomenon  that  occurred  in  various  west african  countries  when  the  route through morocco was shut down in the early 2000s.
this chain reaction eventually led to spains involvement in establishing a detention center  in the west african nation of mauritania in 2006 as part of a larger effort to stem the flow of  migrants to the canary islands (flynn 2006).


mauritanias first dedicated detention center  for unauthorized migrants, sometimes referred to as el guantanamito, was established  inside a former school located in the port city of nouadhibou with assistance provided by  the spanish agency for international development cooperation.
before 2006, in the rare  instances migrants were arrested by the police, they were typically held at police stations  (amnesty international 2008).


spains involvement in establishing the detention center has led to questions over who  controls the facility and guarantees the rights of the detainees, similar questions to those  seen in cases involving the united states and australia.
while the mauritanian national  security  service  appears  to  have  managed  the  facility,  mauritanian  officials  clearly  and  emphatically  stated  to  a  spanish  human  rights  organization  in  october  2008  that  mauritanian  authorities  performed  their  jobs  at  the  express  request  of  the  spanish  government (european social watch 2009).


jurisdictional questions regarding spains activities in mauritania were addressed in the  marine i case,21 which involved a different ad hoc detention facilitythis one located  in  an  abandoned  fish-processing  facility  in  nouadhibouused  by  spain  after  it  aided  passengers aboard a smuggling boat that had lost power in international waters off the  coast of west africa in 2007.
while the un committee against torture ultimately ruled  that the case itself was inadmissible because the complainant, a spanish citizen working   21  committee against torture, j.


h.
a.


v.
spain, 21 nov.


2008, no.
323/2007  187  the diffusion of immigration detention for a human rights ngo, did not have standing, it nevertheless rejected claims by spain  that the incidents covered in the case occurred outside spanish territory.


citing its general  comment no.
2, which provides that a states jurisdiction includes any territory where it  exercises effective control, the committee found that spain   [m]aintained control over the persons on board the marine i from the time the vessel  was rescued and throughout the identification and repatriation process that took place  at  nouadhibou.


in  particular,  the  state  party  exercised,  by  virtue  of  a  diplomatic  agreement  concluded  with  mauritania,  constant  de  facto  control  over  the  alleged  victims during their detention in nouadhibou.
consequently, the committee considers  that the alleged victims are subject to spanish jurisdiction insofar as the complaint that  forms the subject of the present communication is concerned.


22  the  mauritania  situation  reflects  a  broader  trendpreviously  observed  with  australia  and  the  united  statesof  core  countries  attempting  to  deflect  migratory  pressures  by  externalizing immigration controls to states that are not considered main destinations of  migrants and where the rule of law is often weak.
this raises questions about the culpability  of  liberal  democracies  in  the  abuses  detainees  suffer  when  they  are  interdicted  before  reaching their destinations.


the mauritania case is representative of what could be termed direct diffusion, or the  direct  involvement  of  one  country  in  promoting  and  financing  detention  practices  and  policies in another.
this contrasts with indirect diffusion, the emulation of (or learning  from) another countrys policies (e.


g.
, australia copying us programs, or europe using  australias offshore detention as a model).


the eu and its member states have repeatedly  pressured  and  supported  ramped-up  detention  practices  in  neighboring  countries.
they  have also worked through international organizations, like the iom, to prop up overseas  detention efforts.


such a case is the ukraine, where the european commission provided  funds to the iom to work on boosting and reforming detention efforts, including by funding  non-governmental organizations (ngos) to monitor detention centers.
23 according to one  ukraine  expert,  ngos  that  work  with  the  iom  on  the  european  commission-funded  project have been under pressure not to criticize state practices because doing so could  ultimately jeopardize their funding (flynn and cannon 2010).


arguably  europes  best  known  effort  to  become  directly  involved  in  detention  beyond  its  borders  have  been  the  on-again-off-again  proposals  by  the  eu  to  establish  offshore  processing  procedures  in  neighboring  countries  aimed  at  forcing  migrants  to  submit  asylum claims before reaching european soil.
the origins of these proposals are rooted in  european policy discussions that cited the policies of the united states and australia as  examples to follow.


although european officials first began suggesting the offshoring of asylum procedures in  the 1980s (afeef 2006), it was not until 2003, two years after australia proposed its pacific  solution, that the idea gained widespread traction in europe.
that year, the government of  british prime minister tony blair suggested establishing transit processing centers on   22  ibid.


, para.
8.


2.
23  dasney, james (international organisation for migration, kyiv), interview by alex mackinnon (global  detention project),september 30, 2009.


188  journal on migration and human securitythe non-eu side of europes borders.
policy documents from an important and secretive series of intergovernmental meetings at  the time (called the intergovernmental consultation on asylum, refugees and migration  policies, or igc) reveal the central role that the australian policies, as well as us caribbean  policies, played in influencing european leaders.


describing these documents, noll writes:  the  spring  2003  debate  reveals  that  the  pacific  solution  constituted  a  source  of  inspiration for the british and danish governments.
on the 23 april meeting of the  mini-igc  the australian model as well as the haiti and cuban interdiction programs  implemented by the us were discussed.


(2003, 313)  the uk proposal, however, was quickly abandoned after it met strong resistance from a  number  of  european  governments,  including  germany,  which  referred  to  the  proposed  centers as concentration camps.
the idea, or variations of it, has been revived numerous  times since then, though with little success to date because of the apparent reluctance of eu  countries to be viewed as disavowing altogether the 1951 refugee convention.


this  failure  to  establish  an  eu-wide  offshore  processing  policy  has  been  described  by  levy as a consequence of the self-constructed normative image of the eu, the embedded  liberalism of european political culture (levy 2010, 96).
however, as both the cases of the  ukraine and mauritania demonstrate, the eu itself, in addition to individual member states,  have developed other methods for diffusing detention policies and practices.


some of these  efforts predate the pacific solution.
for instance, in 1998, italy and tunisia finalized an  agreement that set conditions for the readmission of tunisian and third-country nationals.


as part this agreement, italy agreed to provide 500 million liras (260,000 euros) expressly  for the creation of migrant detention facilities (centri di permanenza).
24  similarly, the eu as well as individual member states have provided financial assistance  for the detention practices of third countries within the framework of the twinning, or  jumelage, programme, an initiative of the european commission in which eu states  partner with new members, candidate, or potential candidate states, to assist in developing  their  administrative  and  bureaucratic  structures  and  processes.


turkey  has  been  a  key  benefactor.
under  a  2007  twinning  project,  titled  support  to  turkeys  capacity  in  combating illegal migration and establishment of removal centers for illegal migrants,  the  eu  agreed  to  provide  15,000,000  euros  towards  the  establishment  of  two  removal  centers and development of standards for their management.


this project aimed to provide  a better capacity to cope with illegal migration and create centers devoted to the purpose  of  controlling  the  illegal  migrants  to  be  removed  that  will  serve  as  models  for  future  facilities (ec 2007, 4,5; chr 2009, 30).
conclusion: diffusion and responsibility this  paper  has  endeavored  to  describe  various  cases  of  the  diffusion  of  immigration  detention practices and policies to demonstrate how this tool of immigration control has   24  scambio di note tra litalia e la tunisia concernente lingresso e la riammissione delle persone in posizione  irregolare, roma, 6 agosto 1998.


189  the diffusion of immigration detention become a global phenomenon.
it has shown how receiving countries from australia to the  united states to the member states of the eu have successfully diffused detention practices  to  a  large  number  of  states  on  their  peripheries,  helping  to  establish  an  archipelago  of  emerging detention regimes that literally spans the globe.


we have also observed how,  prior to these direct diffusion efforts, important destination countries learned from each  other the purported utility of offshore practices.
the papers characterizations of these various diffusion pathways reflect work done by  numerous scholars who have developed policy transfer frameworks for understanding how  policies spread.


thus, for example, following the work of lavenex and uarer (2004), we  could argue that the diffusion and eventual institutionalization of immigration detention  regimes in periphery countries have involved a combination of both adaptation through  externalitythat  is,  a  mix  of  voluntary  and  involuntary  adaptation  in  response  to  the  impact of policies adopted by another countryand policy transfer through conditionality  involving a level of coercion by another country.
arguably, there are two overarching categories of diffusion, direct and indirect, each of  which contains nuanced subcategories.


on the one hand, we can observe from the cases  described in this paper the transfer through imitation (or indirect diffusion) of offshore  detention strategies from the united states to australia to europe, with the united states  serving as an early innovator (what lavenex and uarer term unilateral emulation).
among  the motives that have spurred these states to adopt such strategies are political decisions  aimed  at  allaying  growing  public  fearswhich  are  often  instigated  or  encouraged  by  political  actorsby  demonstrating  that  authorities  are  taking  all  measures  possible  to  confront the specter of unauthorized migration, as franco frattini put it in his speech  inaugurating frontex.


similarly, such decisions can be based on the belief that interdicting  boats on the high seas and transferring apprehended migrants to third countries will deter  others.
in the case of periphery states, direct and indirect diffusion processes often combine, leading  to the adoption of detention measures.


for instance, periphery states often imitate more  powerful neighborsor each otherwhen migratory pressures force their hand, creating a  domino effect we have seen in europe with respect to the gradual externalization of asylum  and migration pressures from the center of the continent to its external borders.
adding  to these pressures is the eus transparent effort to use membership as a coercive tool for  advancing  interdiction  objectives,  in  particular  through  the  twinning  process.


similar  forces are at play in the cases of mauritania and guatemala, two countries which found  themselves having to adapt to new realities that emerged as a result of the interdiction  policies adopted by regional powers, which may help explain why both were receptive to  external involvement in establishing new detention capabilities.
however, because of the  opacity of the decision-making and discussions involved in these cases, it is difficult to  determine whether they reflect adaptation through externality or policy transfer through  conditionality.


also driving diffusionparticularly direct diffusionmay be the realization that detaining  someone abroad is less expensive than doing so at home.
us anti-smuggling operations  in  honduras  and  elsewhere  in  the  americas  would  appear  to  support  such  a  theory.


additionally, authorities may be spurred to develop innovative measures when policies   190  journal on migration and human securityfail to deliver expected results, like in the case of australia, whose policy of mandatory  detention failed to deter increasing numbers of unauthorized boat arrivals.
another recurring motif in this history has been the response of core countries to normative  pressure stemming from international human rights obligations (like the right to asylum)  by seeking ways to circumvent, co-opt, or otherwise counteract this pressure through the  diffusion of detention to upstream countries.


it seems that a desire to prevent migrants from  accessing asylum procedures and other legal protections has been an important contributing  factor in many of the offshore detention schemes described above.
this is observed in the  us decision to detain haitians on board navy vessels in the early 1990s, which immediately  preceded the decision to establish guantnamo as a migrant operations center.


it is also  observed in the parliamentary deliberations that preceded the establishment of australias  pacific solution, as well as among the motives that have driven eu discussions on whether  to  create  offshore  asylum  processing  centers.
what  one  observer  said  of  australias  policies applies equally to all these cases: by locating asylum seekers offshore, australia  successfully diluted its human rights obligations towards these people and hindered public  scrutiny of their living conditions (afeef 2006).


thus, this paper supports the argument  advanced by numerous scholars, including guiraudon and lahav (2000), that states often  seek to circumvent normative constraints by employing avoidance mechanisms.
however, these reflections come with a number of caveats.


for instance, at the same time  that human rights norms appear to have helped motivate states to externalize detention  efforts,  they  may  have  also  worked  to  limit  the  extent  to  which  states  pursue  such  efforts, as levy (2010) argues has been the case with the eu and its failure to agree on a  community-wide offshore processing policy.
insofar as this is the case, it underscores a  broader argument that has been described in other writings by this authorthat normative  pressure has generated a schizophrenic response by liberal democracies with respect to  their immigration detention regimes (see flynn 2013).


also, the normative argument presumes a unidirectional process, leading from the core  to the periphery.
but as seen with the history of us-cuban relations, it is not always the  hegemonic  country  that  sets  the  conditions  of  migration  arrangements.


in  europe,  the  most notorious case of a non-eu country attempting to drive the process is that of libya.
in mid-2010, just a few months before the north atlantic treaty organization (nato)  began bombing that country in support of rebels, muammar gaddafi took advantage of  a diplomatic trip to italy to warn that without his support europe might no longer be  european and even black as there are millions who want to come in (squires 2010).


because of the predominance of discourses of fear regarding impending invasions of  migrants  in  main  destination  countries,  these  countries  make  themselves  vulnerable  to  blackmail by their neighbors.
the degree to which transit states have been able to exploit  this fear to establish favorable quid-pro-quo arrangements as part of diffusion processes is  beyond the scope of this paper.


however, it is an important and generally overlooked issue  that should be kept in mind when considering the various elements that have contributed to  the overall phenomenon of the spreading of immigration detention.
ultimately, regardless of the particular channel by which detention practices and policies  spread, a key lesson should be that in an interconnected world, the policies pursued by one   191  the diffusion of immigration detention country can have an enormous impact on how people are treated on the other side of the  globe.


through  the  forces  of  example,  learning,  coercion,  and  persuasion,  immigration  detention has attained global dimensions.
the role that the united states and other wealthy  countries have played in this process should be better acknowledged, especially when we  see that this process has at times been driven by efforts to evade fundamental rights and  with the result that thousands of people are confined in paltry and inhuman conditions  without proper legal guarantees.


just as offshore interdiction and detention schemes raise  important questions about custody, accountability, and sovereignty, they should also spur  questions over where responsibility for the wellbeing of migrants begins and ends.


