citizen or subordinate:  permutations of belonging in the  united states and the dominican  republic  shaina aber jesuit conference of the united states  mary small jesuit refugee service/usa   executive summary the dominican republic and the united states have both experienced tensions arising  from migratory flows from poorer, less stable neighbors.
until recently, both countries  had constitutions which conferred citizenship by birth with very limited exceptions.


despite  these  similarities,  their  respective  discourses  around  jus  soli  citizenship,  particularly for  the children of  unauthorized migrants from  the poorer  neighboring  countries, have manifested in different ways.
the identity of the united states as a  nation of immigrants has limited the success of campaigns to revoke jus soli citizenship  for the children of unauthorized immigrants, but the persistent articulation of this idea  as a response to illegal migration has shifted the parameters of the immigration debate.


in the dominican republic, the historical construction of national identity and anti- haitian discourse has led to an evolution in dominican law which codifies already  established  practices  that  deny  citizenship  to  children  of  haitian  migrants.
in  both  cases, movements that support more inclusive understandings of societal belonging,  like  the  dreamers  in  the  united  states  and  youth  movements  in  the  dominican  republic, may offer the most effective way of protecting universal jus soli citizenship  regimes.


introduction both the united states and the dominican republic have recently grappled with the idea of  redefining their citizenship standards in response to tensions arising from large migratory  flows from poorer, less stable neighboring countries.
comparisons between these countries  often focus on their respective legal frameworks for conferring citizenship, but a close  examination of the ensuing debates reveals a broader discourse around membership and  gradations of belonging.


this article argues that national identity is the principal mode  through which citizenship frameworks are interpreted and enacted.
moreover, it posits that    2013 by the center for migration studies of new york.


all rights reserved.
jmhs volume 1 number 3 (2013): 76-96evolving national narratives that define membership in society interact with and at times  push the boundaries of legal citizenship regimes.


globally, there are multiple systems that govern the conferral of citizenship at birth.
the  two primary systems of birthright citizenship are jus sanguinis, or citizenship by blood, and  jus soli, or citizenship by soil (place of birth).


virtually every country has some version  of jus sanguinis in which parents can pass on their nationality to their children.
in the  americas, 30 of 35 sovereign nations have jus soli systems which confer citizenship on  nearly  every  child  born  within  their  territory  (culliton-gonzalez  2012).


the  ability  to  attain citizenship is a high stakes question.
within the current global system of sovereign  nation states, citizenship is what obliges a state to protect an individual.


said differently,  nationality is the right to have rights (arendt 1968, 299) as it opens the door to numerous  opportunities and privileges (mancini and finlay 2008; middleton and wigginton 2012;  shachar 2007; van waas 2007).
in many ways, the challenges faced by both the united states and the dominican republic  with  regard  to  citizenship  are  infused  with  global  themes  and  show  how  citizenship  operates as both a formal legal status and as a social identity (keyes 2013; plascencia  2012).


around  the  world,  the  increasingly  permanentpresence  of  large  numbers  of  unauthorized immigrants is putting pressure on immigration and citizenship policies as  a balance is sought between inclusion and exclusion (van waas 2007).
debates about  conferral of jus soli citizenship mask a broader debate about membership and belonging,  particularly regarding unauthorized migrants from poor sending countries.


for this reason,  constitutional scholars note that revocations of jus solitake place within the context  of inegalitarian campaigns to discourage permanence, to diminish rights, and to institute  caste division (mancini and finlay 2008, 594).
the emergence of these debates now  is surprising, given that the morality of caste and second-class status systems was widely  repudiated by the end of the last century.


nevertheless, the impacts of proposed changes  in citizenship regimes call into question whether or not migrants and their children are  considered part of society and are afforded their fundamental civil and human rights.
this article seeks to complement the theoretical literature on citizenship by exploring the  current and historical debates around jus soli citizenship in both the dominican republic  and the united states.


given the uncommon prevalence of jus soli citizenship regimes  in the western hemisphere, the barriers to inclusionenacted or proposed make the  comparative study of these two countries compelling.
we begin by discussing the historical  context for migration from mexico to the united states and from haiti to the dominican  republic with particular attention to the factors that have led to large unauthorized migrant  populations.


in the us context, we then explore the persistent attacks on jus soli citizenship,  which often occur in the context of restrictionist immigration proposals.
in the dominican  republic, we detail the current practice of denying and revoking citizenship for dominicans  of haitian descent, and the evolving legal justifications for these practices.


with these two  cases in mind, we analyze the ultimate impact of struggles over jus soli citizenship.
within  the  united  states,  debate  over  the  legal  status  of  the  children  of  unauthorized  immigrants  has  had  the  effect  of  shifting  the  parameters  of  political  discourse  about   77  citizen or subordinateimmigration  policy.


this  has  led  to  proposals  that  range  from  locking  undocumented  immigrants into a permanent second-tier status to arduous, exclusionary, and lengthy paths to  citizenship for the millions of undocumented immigrants.
within the dominican republic,  the denial and revocation of citizenship of dominicans of haitian descent has been broadly  accepted, and has demonstrated an entrenchment and constriction of dominican national  identity.


for both nations, we suggest that the model offered by youth movements, which  engage understandings of national identity and articulate a more inclusive conception of  belonging, may offer the best path forward.
migration context between the us and mexico current debates surrounding jus soli citizenship in the united states must be contextualized  in light of its immigration and citizenship history.


drawn by the countrys vast economic  resources, and cultural and political hegemony, people migrate to the united states from all  over the world, but a plurality of the foreign-born population claim mexico as their country  of  origin.
particular  attention  to  the  complex  bilateral  migratory  relationship  between  the united states and mexico helps to trace the source of recent debates about the legal  obligations and societal impacts of a jus soli system.


the united states and mexico share a 2,000-mile border that spans four us and six mexican  states.
historically, mexican migration was largely temporary, circular and employment- based, and few restrictions were placed on the movement of people or goods across the us- mexico border1 until 1924 when the us border patrol was established (southern poverty  law center 2013, 3).


contemporary mexican migration to the united states began through  direct-recruitment  initiatives  by  us  companies  in  the  period  after  the  civil  war.
the  bracero program, which operated between 1942 and 1964 through a bilateral agreement  between  the  united  states  and  mexico,  attracted  more  than  400,000  workers  a  year  at  its peak (ibid).


following the conclusion of the bracero program, a numerical limit was  placed on mexican migration to the united states in 1965 (crs 2012a, 8).
it was only then  that the century-old migration flow from mexico, mostly into the low-wage labor sector,  became largely characterized as illegal.


1  it is worth noting that the near absence of immigration enforcement infrastructure coincided with a legal  regime that rarely deported immigrants who had settled in the united states, even those who entered without  inspection.
deportation was not a penalty under the law for most irregular migration, though the immigration  act of 1891 did establish deportation as a penalty for immigrants who became public charges within one year  of initial entry, restricted admission for people with certain illnesses, and generally represented the beginning  of  a  series  of  steps  to  create  more  restrictive  and  discriminatory  immigration  policies.


a  year  later,  the  chinese exclusion act passed in 1892, prohibiting the immigration of all chinese laborers.
later, the 1917  immigration act instituted a literacy test for admission with the aim of minimizing southern and eastern  european immigration, extended the period in which a person could be subject to deportation to five years  and included national security language aimed at deporting anarchists or communists (ngai 2003, 69-71).


the immigration act of 1924 enacted national origin quotas, excluded certain undesirables like paupers,  criminals, anarchists and the diseased and extended chinese exclusion to other asian groups.
however,  the immigration act of 1924 did not make mexico or any of the other western hemisphere countries subject  to the new numerical quotas.


mass deportations occasionally occurred in extra-legal contexts, such as the  palmer raids of the winter of 1919-1920.
during the 1930s, depression-era mexican immigrants and us- born mexican-americans alike were rounded up and expelled from the country without any process of law  (ngai 2004, 3, 17-19).


78  journal on migration and human securitydespite the newly-minted restrictions on mexican immigrants seeking permanent residence  in the united states or traveling across the border, migration picked up speed, set into  motion by a combination of economic and political factors.
illegal immigration became a  topic of public concern as apprehensions of unauthorized immigrants, 80 percent of whom  were mexican nationals, tripled between 1965 and 1970 (crs 2012a, 2,6).


around this  time, the united states began to experience swifter growth in its share of foreign-born  persons of mexican origin, though it was not until 1980 that the share of the foreign-born  from mexico exceeded that of italy, germany or canada (grieco, et al.
2012, 7).


the  shift  in  migration  patterns  from  mexico  coincided  with  a  dramatic  shift  in  us  immigration policy toward an increasingly restrictionist model (carnegie endowment for  international peace and instituto tecnolgico autnomo de mxico 2001, 1, 6-7).
despite  this, mexican migration continued to grow rapidly throughout the eighties, nineties, and  early  2000s.


mexican  immigrants  have  accounted  for  the  largest  share  of  foreign-born  residents over the last 30 years (gibson and jung 2006).
they represent the largest group  of aliens subject to us immigration control and border security policies, the largest group  of lawful immigrants within permanent and temporary visa categories, and the majority of  unauthorized migrants within the united states (crs 2012a, 2).


as of 2011, mexicans  constituted 58 percent of us unauthorized immigrants.
likewise, the majority of children  born to undocumented immigrants in the united states are of mexican origin (passel and  cohn 2011, 2).


in the last two decades, the united states and mexico have also experienced intentional  and unprecedented economic integration, arising in large part from the trade infrastructure  put in place by the north american free trade agreement (nafta) in 1994 (carnegie  endowment  for  international  peace  and  instituto  tecnolgico  autnomo  de  mxico  2001, 1).
the united states is mexicos principal trading partner, and mexico is currently  the third largest trading partner for the united states, a trade relationship that was only  deepened  by  nafta  (crs  2012b,  1).


yet,  even  as  the  countries  interdependence  has  increased, a vastly disparate economic relationship persists.
in the united states the per  capita gross domestic product (gdp) is $49,800 while in mexico it is only $15,300 (us  central intelligence agency 2013).


this disparity has acted as a continued pull factor for  mexican migrants looking to improve their lives.
while scholarly discussions centered on changing the laws or policies governing jus soli  citizenship usually frame arguments in nationality and racially neutral terms, the debate  among political and media actors, perhaps predictably, has drawn heavily upon the popular  imagery of mexican migrants.


migration context between the dominican republic and  haiti the  dominican  republic  and  haiti  have  a  similarly  long  and  complicated  history  that  deeply impacts understandings of identity and belonging in the dominican republic.
like  the united states and mexico, the relationship between the dominican republic and haiti  79  citizen or subordinate is characterized by a significant flow of unauthorized migrants, economic interdependence,  and reliance on cheap migrant labor.


after an ultimately unsuccessful effort to unify the island and abolish slavery in what is  now the dominican republic by haitian revolutionaries in 1801, the newly independent  haiti struggled with perceived and real threats of recolonization launched by the french  from the other side of the island.
in an attempt to solidify haitian sovereignty, unite the  island of hispaniola, and abolish slavery from the dominican side of the island, haiti led  a successful military invasion of the dominican republic in 1821.


the invasion resulted  in the abolition of slavery, but the subsequent 22-year period of haitian occupation of the  dominican side of the island is viewed in the dominican popular imagination as a time  of oppression, brutality and suffering, when the spanish language was banned, land was  expropriated from white plantation owners, and spanish colonial customs were outlawed.
this historical narrative anchors present day feelings toward haitian migrants.


while there is a long history of migration between the dominican republic and haiti, the  beginnings of the current situation can be traced back to the dominican sugar industry  (vergne  2005,  84).
beginning  in  the  early  1900s,  the  dominican  republic  facilitated  the  recruitment  of  haitians  to  work  the  sugar  harvest.


it  is  estimated  that  about  5,000  haitian laborers were contracted each year until 1986 (wooding and moseley-williams  2004, 24).
similar to the bracero program in the united states, sugar cane workers came  through regulated channels established by both governments, as well as through a parallel,  informal one.


in each case, the receiving country expected to fully control their imported  labor source.
patterns of settlement and networks among diaspora groups were established  through the circular migration of seasonal labor, which led to more migration.


as migrants  began to lay down permanent roots, receiving countries were confronted with the migration  of thousands of people over decades.
rather  than  come  to  terms  with  the  effects  of  migration,  the  dominican  government  tried  to  brutally  undo  them  by  force.


in  1937,general  rafael trujillo,  in  an  attempt  to  dominicanize the border, exploited a latent sense of fear about the scarcity of resources,  made haitians a convenient scapegoat, and ordered the massacre of thousands of haitians  and people of haitian descent in the border provinces.
workers on dominican sugar estates,  most of which were owned by us companies, were protected, highlighting the tension  between the economic need for a low-wage labor force and the exclusion of haitians and  their descendants from membership in the dominican community.


the trujillo dictatorship  also fostered a national identity and institutional racism that favored whites over blacks  (middleton and wigginton 2012; duany 1998; howard 2001).
while this history laid the foundation for todays situation, changes following the decline of  the sugar industry in the 1980s are also important.


with long-term political and economic  turmoil  in  haiti  and  a  more  diversified  dominican  economy,  many  of  the  haitians  who migrated in the last three decades work in non-sugar agricultural sectors, tourism,  construction, and domestic service (wooding and moseley-williams 2004, 14).
on one  hand,  these  changes  have  proven  incompatible  with  the  dominican  desire  for  a  purely  seasonal, temporary haitian presence.


on the other, the dominican economy was built on  a supply of inexpensive and compliant labor, and still depends on it for continued growth.
80  journal on migration and human securityhowever, the supply of haitian labor is based on more than just dominican demand; it is  also driven by haitis poverty and political instability.


in 2011, haiti had a per capita gdp  of $700 and a poverty rate of 77 percent (world bank 2011b).
the dominican republic,  on the other hand, had a per capita gdp of $5,240, or 7.


5 times that of haiti, and 40.
4  percent of the population lived at or below the poverty line (world bank 2011a).


a similar  disparity exists regarding health.
child and maternal mortality rates are more than twice  as high in haiti as they are in the dominican republic, and the life expectancy at birth in  the dominican republic is 15 years higher than in haiti (us central intelligence agency  2013).


lack of recognition of the diversity among the haitian and haitian-descendant population  in the dominican republic has also presented difficulties.
ferguson describes this dynamic  well, writing that this population is characterized by voluntary and involuntary migration,  long and short-term residence in the dominican republic, legal and illegal entry, smuggling,  expulsions and a long history of human rights abuses (ferguson 2003, 9).


when policies  motivated by anti-haitianism are implemented, the negative impacts are felt by all people  who  are  somehow  marked  as  haitian,  regardless  of  whether  they  are  recent  migrants,  third generation dominicans or even black dominicans with no haitian ancestry.
anti- hatianism destabilizes the citizenship system, as well as broader senses of membership  and belonging.


the question of how many haitians live in the dominican republic is highly politicized and  further complicated by the lack of recognition of differences between recent migrants, long  term residents, and dominican-born descendants (baluarte 2006; wooding and moseley- williams 2004).
official records of the dominican government show fewer than 5,000  lawful haitian residents of the dominican republic.


the first ever national-level survey  of immigrants in the dominican republic found 458,233 people who were haitian-born  (oficina nacional de estadstica 2013), while dominican nationalist groups contend that  there are closer to one million haitians (baluarte 2006, 25).
threats to jus soli citizenship in the us in both the dominican republic and the united states, the historical migration context  between neighbors has shaped the discourse around jus soli citizenship as well as broader  narratives about belonging.


the national identity of the united states is built on american  exceptionalism and a shared historical narrative about a nation of immigrants in which  opportunity is open to all.
still, worries about the swift demographic changes that became  evident in the 1980 census, driven in large-part by irregular immigration of mexicans and  other latin americans, led to discussions in political and academic circles about the best  ways to discourage irregular migration, stem the tide of demographic change, and integrate  millions of unauthorized immigrants into american society.


concern over how to deal with  the countrys large and growing unauthorized population led to a range of proposals that  were debated for nearly a decade before the immigration reform and control act (irca)  finally passed in 1986.
while irca is remembered today for creating the infrastructure  to grant legal status and eventual citizenship to millions of unauthorized immigrants, the  debate that brought irca about and the language of the bill itself also set in motion a  number of measures aimed at discouraging and combating irregular migration (cooper and   81  citizen or subordinateoneill 2005) including employer sanctions, interior enforcement, and a rapid increase in  border enforcement.


a  relative  latecomer  to  the  mainstream  policy  debate  which  preceded  the  passage  of  irca, the examination of jus soli citizenship in the united states as a contested area of  constitutional law is attributed (bloemraad 2013) to a controversial book published in 1985,  citizenship without consent: illegal aliens in the american polity.
the book, penned by  two professors at yale university, peter schuck and rogers smith, questioned whether the  children of unauthorized immigrants merited citizenship under the fourteenth amendment  to the us constitution (smith 2009, 1331).


this argument was swiftly taken up by both  politicians and advocacy organizations with restrictionist agendas like the federation for  american immigration reform (fair), which disseminated the publication as a solution  to the latin onslaught problem (culliton-gonzalez 2012, 157).
the fourteenth amendment to the us constitution was enacted in 1868, three years after  the end of the civil war.


its citizenship clause reads, all persons born or naturalized in  the united states, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the united states  and of the state wherein they reside.
2 schuck and smiths argument is that the subject to  the jurisdiction thereof clause is not a nod to jus soli, but rather should be read within the  context of consent as the foundational principle for political membership in the american  republic (schuck and smith 1996, 20).


the two argued that the fourteenth amendment  did  not  require  automatic  citizenship  for  the  children  of  unauthorized  persons.
rather,  this was a matter left for the legislature to determine.


the book contended that united  states v.
wong kim ark,3 the foundational case that applied the fourteenth amendment to  confer citizenship to the children of immigrants born within us territory with very narrow  exceptions, applied only to citizenship of the children of legally admitted immigrants, not  those of unauthorized immigrants (smith 2009, 1331).


the arguments put forth in citizenship without consent have been repudiated by a veritable  surfeit  of  legal  scholars  and  practitioners  (carens  1987;  eisgruber  1997;  martin  1985;  neuman 1987; pear 1996; rodrguez 2009; schwartz 1986) who questioned the validity  of legal and historical arguments posited by schuck and smith and identified the perverse  policy implications of reinterpreting the constitution in a manner which would solidify a  two-tiered caste system in a country that defines itself as a land of exceptional opportunity  where the socio-economic status of ones parents need not dictate ones future possibilities  (ho 2006; dellinger 1996; stock 2007).
the critics of universal jus soli have had little  political success in enacting a change in the us citizenship regime, despite the persistence  of champions in congress over the past thirty years.


schuck and smiths argument ultimately was published a bit too late to play a prominent  role in the pre-irca immigration debate of the mid-eighties, but when the controversies  surrounding immigration arose again, this time characterized by an exclusively restrictionist  flavor, the validity of jus soli citizenship for the us-born children of unauthorized immigrants  emerged prominently.
in 1996, the republican party adopted the repeal of universal jus soli  citizenship as part of its party platform writing, we support a constitutional amendment   2 u.


s.
const.


amend.
xiv,  1.


3 united states v.
wong kim ark, 169 u.


s.
649 (1898).


82  journal on migration and human securityor constitutionally-valid legislation declaring that children born in the united states of  parents who are not legally present in the united states or who are not long-term residents  are not automatically citizens (the american presidency project 1996).
in the 1990s, irregular migration from mexico, which had declined in the years immediately  following the passage of irca, again began to rise (zavodny 2012).


at the same time,  the war on crime, discontent with the welfare system, public anxiety about drugs, gang  violence and other public safety concerns reached their zenith as an economic downturn hit  the united states.
mexican immigrants and mexican-americans were explicitly associated  with societal ills in both political discourse and popular culture, and anti-immigrant lobbies  grew  in  strength  (durand,  massey  and  parrado  1999,  519,  530).


seizing  the  political  moment, and armed with schuck and smiths conclusions on the congressional authority  to  limit  jus  soli  citizenship  and  a  report  from  the  restrictionist  center  for  immigration  studies (cis), representative elton gallegly (r-ca) took to the floor of the us house of  representatives on october 22, 1991, and proposed that congress act to deny citizenship  to the us-born children of undocumented persons.
some  constitutional  scholars,  including  peter  schuck  and  roger  smith  of  yale  university, have suggested that birthright citizenship is an anomaly in a nation that is  based on the will of the people and government by consent and propose a reinterpretation  of the 14th amendments citizenship clauseclearly, the present guarantee under our  laws of automatic birthright citizenship to the children of illegal aliens is one more  causal factor contributing to the crisis of illegal immigration.


when this enticement is  combined with the attraction of expanded entitlements conferred upon citizen children  and their families by the welfare state, the total effect of birthright citizenship laws is  significant and clearly harmful.
it is time for congress to act to remove such powerful  incentives.


4  galleglys proposal gained attention in the press and support from members of his party  (fox news 2013; the american presidency project 1996; malkin 2003).
in response, he  introduced a house joint resolution at the beginning of the 103rd congressional session  to amend the constitution to eliminate jus soli citizenship for all children of unauthorized  immigrants born after the bills enactment.


the bill earned 42 co-sponsors that session but  never made it out of committee.
subsequently, gallegly introduced or co-sponsored similar  bills in every congressional session thereafter until his retirement in 2012.


the threat of these ideas is often inaccurately assessed.
at its peak, proposed legislation to  repeal jus soli citizenship for the children of the unauthorized had 104 cosponsors.


despite  this show of support, these threats have been largely marginal to the immigration debate,  as none of these bills ever made it out of committee, even with galleglys seniority and  leadership position on the house judiciary committees subcommittee on immigration  policy and enforcement in the 112th congress (smith 2009, 1333).
so while the threat of  repeal has been a disproportionately influential anchor to the immigration debate, it has  never come anywhere close to winning congressional approval or broader popular support  (ibid).


however, the fact that the citizenship of children of undocumented immigrants is  coming under political scrutiny makes the idea of naturalizing the unauthorized appear   4 137 cong.
rec.


h8180 (daily ed.
october 22, 1991).


83  citizen or subordinateless attainable, ultimately compressing the breadth of policy proposals put forth in favor of  recognizing their rights and contributions.
threats to jus soli citizenship in the dominican republic the evolving legislation of the dominican republic, however, does constitute a serious  threat to jus soli citizenship.


current implementation practices go beyond the letter of the  law to create an additional de facto threat to jus soli citizenship.
throughout the countrys  history,  exclusionary  practices  have  predated  the  actual  legislative  or  administrative  changes needed to justify them.


through  the  1990s,  the  dominican  state  formally  recognized  a  significant  number  of  dominicans of haitian descent as citizens.
many haitian parents were successful in using  haitian  identity  documents  to  register  their  childrens  births,  and  were  able  to  access  official  birth  certificates,  which  ultimately led  to  adult  national  identity  cards  for  these  children.


the civil registry also habitually accepted workplace identity cards issued by  dominican companies that hired haitian laborers as parental identification for the purposes  of registering a birth (open society foundations 2010).
however, there also developed a multi-generational class of undocumented dominicans  of  haitian  descent  due  to  ad  hoc  and  sometimes  regional  decisions  of  civil  registry  designees.


without any legal basis, some civil registry offices determined that the children  of undocumented haitian parents did not have a right to dominican nationality.
since the  early 2000s, the law has changed to make these ad hoc practices official and universal.


prior to 2010, the dominican constitution provided for a relatively straightforward jus soli  citizenship regime, with the exception of children born to foreign diplomats and people in  transit.
denial of citizenship to dominican-born children of haitian descent began in an  ad hoc  and arbitrary way but was first justified by exploiting the in transit exception in  the constitution.


despite this, the matter was relatively settled in dominican law.
until  2004, the governing legislation around migration was enunciated in the rules of procedure  of migration no.


279 of 1939.
this code clearly stated that the purpose of the person in  transit is merely to pass through the territory and, to this end, it establishe[d] a temporal  limit of  no  more than ten days.


5  in  addition, the immigration act no.
95  of  1939,  as  well as statements by the dominican republic before the un human rights committee,  affirmed that in transit ordinarily applied to persons who were in the country for ten or  fewer days (cited in open society foundations 2010, 3).


in 2004, the practice of some civil registry offices of denying nationality to the dominican- born children of unauthorized haitian migrants became law under migration law 285-04.
a year later, it was upheld by the dominican supreme court.


among other provisions,  this law applied the in transit provision within the constitution to all non-residents  including  temporary  foreign  workers,  migrants  with  expired  visas  and  undocumented  migrants, constituting a significant change in the citizenship structure of the dominican  republic.
in  order  to  prevent  this  new  law  from  becoming  retroactive  in  its  impact,   5 dilcia yean and violeta bosico v.


dominican republic, judgment of september 8, 2005, inter-am ct.
h.


r.
(ser.


c), no.
130 (2005), para.


156.
84  journal on migration and human securityarticles 151 and 152 within the migration law also direct the government to conduct a  regularization process for long-term unauthorized migrants who meet specific eligibility  requirements  (wooding  2009;  open  society  justice  initiative  and  center  for  justice  in  international law2013).


however, such a regularization plan has never been implemented  and retroactive application became the norm.
specifically, migration law 285-04 directs hospitals to give non-resident mothers different  certificates of live birth than those given to resident mothers.


the regular certificates of  live birth given to dominican citizens and legal residents can be presented at the office of  the civil registry to receive an official birth certificate.
this official birth certificate, in turn,  allows children to take school examinations.


a certified copy of the official birth certificate  is also used to get an adult identification card upon the childs 18th birthday.
the  certificates  of  live  birth  given  to  non-resident  mothers  cannot  be  used  to  get  an  official birth certificate.


these special certificates grant no rights to the child and place  no obligations upon the dominican state.
instead, they are sent to the ministry of foreign  relations,  the  directorate  for  migration,  and  the  central  electoral  board  (jce,  by  its  spanish acronym), which is the government agency responsible for administering the civil  registry.


eventually, information from the certificates is entered into the foreign register.
under  the  law,  non-resident  parents  should  register  their  children  with  the  embassy  or  consulate of their country of origin in order to access an official birth certificate.


without the regular certificate of live birth, non-resident parents cannot access an official  birth certificate for their children, preventing them from obtaining identification cards upon  reaching adulthood.
this break in the chain of official documentation was anticipated by  scholars who pointed to birth registration as an important point of vulnerability, claiming  that without proof of these ties, the child [of unauthorized immigrants] will have difficulty  claiming  the  nationality  to  which  he  [or  she]  is  entitled  (van  waas  2007).


similarly,  unicef describes an official birth certificate as a membership card for society that open[s] the door to the enjoyment of a whole range of other rights including education and  health care, participation, and protection (unicef 2002, 1).
the  identification  card  and  a  notarized  single-use  copy  of  the  birth  certificate  are  the  documents required to access most rights and opportunities in the dominican republic,  including secondary education, jobs in the formal sector, state-recognized marriage, a bank  account,  and  the  right  to  vote.


in  fact,  dominican  law  requires  that  all  adults  carry  an  identification card, and being caught without one can result in fines, imprisonment or, in rare  cases, deportation (open society foundations 2010, 4).
although the right to nationality is  regulated by law, it is manifested in the issuance of these documents.


since  2004,  these  documents  and  the  enjoyment  of  rights  linked  to  their  possession  have become even more difficult to access for dominicans of haitian descent.
in 2007,  contemporaneously with the implementation of the migration law, the jce issued circular  017, directing civil registry officers not to give anyone with suspect documents a certified  copy of their birth certificate.


however, the determination that documents are suspect is  entirely up to the discretion of each civil servant.
civil registry officials have admitted to  using darker skin color, facial features associated with haitians, a persons accent, and  85  citizen or subordinatehaitian-sounding names to make determinations (open society foundations 2010; open  society justice initiative and center for justice in international law 2013).


the following year, resolution 12-2008 was released.
this internal administrative memo  authorized civil registry officials to suspend state identification documents if the documents  were deemed irregular.


the effects of suspension have been severe.
while their documents  are  under  investigation,  a  process  that  can  sometimes  take  years,  affected  individuals  cannot  do  anything  that  requires  proof  of  citizenship  or  lawful  residence.


ostensibly  intended to clean up the civil registry from years of fraud, corruption, and incompetence,  the implementation of the resolution has inconsistently and disproportionately affected  dominicans of haitian descent.
in 2011, the supreme court upheld circular 017 and the actions of the jce in refusing to  give emildo bueno, a dominican of haitian descent, a certified copy of his birth certificate.


the court held that the jce has the authority to implement any administrative measure  needed  to  manage  the  civil  registry  and  implement  the  relevant  laws,  including  the  2004 general law on migration (open society justice initiative and center for justice in  international law 2013, 10-11).
the  implementation  of  circular  017  and  resolution  12  has  thus  clearly  extended  beyond the letter of the actual legislation.


in addition to instances in which civil registry  officials used problematic evidence such a skin color and haitian-sounding names to  label documents as suspect and suspend them, there have also been instances in which  officially-issued  documents  were  retroactively  invalidated  through  administrative  de- nationalization declarations which are made verbally by officials of the jce rather than in  judicial proceedings as mandated by dominican law (open society justice initiative and  center for justice in international law 2013).
the  impacts  of  these  legislative  and  administrative  changes  have  also  been  noted  by  international  bodies.


in  2005,  the  inter-american  court  of  human  rights  issued  its  decision in the dilcia yean and violeta bosico v.
dominican republic case.


the court  found that the dominican republic had applied its nationality and birth registration laws  in  a  discriminatory  manner  which  had  the  effect  of  rendering  dominican  children  of  haitian descent effectively stateless and barred them from accessing basic human rights  in violation of the inter-american convention on human rights (baluarte 2006, 27).
as  a result, the court ordered the government to comply with its own constitution and, more  specifically, to create an effective process for granting birth certificates to all children born  in the country, regardless of their parents migratory status.


6 the  ruling  was  the  first  judgment  against  the  dominican  republic  since  it  ratified  the  jurisdiction of the inter-american court in 1999, and the backlash against it was severe.
in addition to extremely negative coverage in the media and several outbreaks of violence  against haitians and dominicans of haitian descent, the vice president spoke out against  the validity of the courts decision and the dominican senate issued a resolution officially  rejecting the courts ruling (baluarte 2006).


6 dilcia yean and violeta bosico v.
dominican republic, judgment of september 8, 2005, inter-am ct.


h.
r.


(ser.
c), no.


130 (2005).
86  journal on migration and human securityin 2010, the dominican government revised its constitution.


in the newest version of the  constitution, the children of unauthorized immigrants were explicitly added to the list of  those excluded from jus soli citizenship.
however, the drafters of the 2010 constitution  were careful to include language explicitly forbidding the retroactive application of new  citizenship provisions.


article 110 states, the law only mandates and applies to the future.
it  does  not  have  a  retroactive  effectin  no  case  will  political  leaders  or  the  law  have  the ability to affect or change the juridical security derived from situations established in  adherence to prior legislation.


7 nevertheless, cases of retroactive application of the new constitutional provisions have been  well-documented (open society justice initiative and center for justice in international  law 2013).
several dominicans of haitian descent have challenged the denial of their  identity documents in court, and many have won in the first instance.


however, to date,  the jce has not complied with these rulings and has appealed all decisions (ibid, 10-11).
the open society foundations, like most other human rights organizations, paints a grim  picture of the current reality for dominicans of haitian descent.


in the dominican republic, enjoyment of the right to nationality has become all but  impossible for persons of haitian descent.
following decades of ad hoc discrimination  in access to the identity documents that recognized them as lawful citizens, dominicans  of haitian descent have since 2004 faced an avalanche of hostile legislative changes  and  administrative  policies  that  have  restricted  their  ability  to  enjoy  [dominican]  nationality .


.
.


singled out because of their national origin and their skin color, thousands  of dominicans of haitian descent have been left effectively stateless and permanently  excluded from the political, economic, social and cultural life of their country of birth  and residence.
(open society foundations 2010, 2)  the effect of the struggle around jus soli citizenship in  the united states while critics of jus soli citizenship in the united states have not been as effective as their  counterparts  in  the  dominican  republic,  their  campaign  has  still  affected  immigration  policy in significant ways.


in the post-civil rights era, apartheid-like legal regimes have  been thoroughly rejected.
nevertheless, the legislative reinterpretation of the fourteenth  amendments  jus  soli  citizenship  clause  would  create  a  permanent  second-tier  of  us  residents.


while the frontal attack on jus soli citizenship in the us has been unsuccessful,  the threat of revoking jus soli citizenship has been used to carve out the far-right flank of  the immigration debate in the united states.
in early 2013, as all signals pointed towards a  concerted effort to move immigration legislation through congress, it was no accident that  one of the first pieces of immigration-related legislation introduced in the 113th congress  was representative steve kings birthright citizenship act of 20138 which would bar jus  soli citizenship for children of undocumented migrants in the future.


the effect of pulling out the right flank can be seen concretely within the current immigration  debate.
representative bob goodlate, the chairman of the house judiciary committee  7 dominican republic const.


art.
cx,  4.


8 h.
r.


140, 113th cong (2013).
87  citizen or subordinatefor the 113th congress, has suggested a pathway to legalization, but not citizenship, for  those unauthorized people who meet certain eligibility criteria.


this proposed creation of  a permanent second-class of residents has the effect of making the alternative proposal in  the senate, an approximately thirteen-year provisional status that could eventually lead to  citizenship for some percentage of the unauthorized, seem exceedingly generous.
alternately, the fact that unauthorized youth known as dreamers have garnered broad  and  bipartisan  support  has  pulled  out  the  left  flank  as  well.


in  2001,  the  dream act  (development, relief and education for alien minors act) was introduced for the first  time.
although it has appeared in numerous permutations since 2001, all versions have  been premised on the idea that persons who were brought to the us as children should not  be punished with permanent unauthorized status because of the choices of their parents.


this idea has its foundation in some of the same anti-caste principles and equal protection  jurisprudence that support jus soli citizenship acquisition in the united states (rodrguez  2009, 1337).
9 10 since the initial introduction of the act, dreamers have been caught  in an intermediary limbo status.


while increasingly embraced as recognized members of  us society, they remain in a tenuous legal position created by an administrative waiver  (napolitano 2012; saavedra 2012).
the  nearly-universal  recognition  of  dreamers  membership  rights  was  forecasted  20  years earlier by supreme court justice brennan when he found that laws that im[pose]  a lifetime of hardship on a discrete class of children not accountable for their disabling  status to be incompatible with fundamental conceptions of justice.


11 dreamers still do  not have permanent legal status, but due to the prosecutorial discretion of the department  of homeland security, they have a measure of protection against detention and deportation.
this intermediary status has been expanded even further under the obama administrations  deferred  action  for  childhood  arrivals  (daca)  program.


under  daca,  dream- eligible young people can apply for a two-year reprieve from the risk of deportation as  well as work authorization if they can demonstrate economic necessity.
the political effect of mobilized dreamers and their allies, and the ability of this group  to  capture  the  imagination  of  the american  public  and  redefine  what  it  means  to  be  american has been particularly visible during the 2013 immigration debate.


even staunch  restrictionist agencies like the center for immigration studies which vociferously opposed  the dream act when it came to vote in 2010, have repeatedly conceded the need to find  a solution for young immigrants who entered the united states as children.
in testimony  before the senate judiciary committee, ciss jessica vaughan stated, lawmakers should  start with areas of reform around which there is already significant consensus and popular  support.


these includeamnesty for illegal aliens brought by their parents at a young age  and who grew up here (vaughan february 13, 2013).
during the decade since senator durbin first introduced the dream act, these immigrant  youth have managed to frame themselves as the modern-day versions of the tenacious and  enterprising immigrants of decades past who will inject american society with a renewed  youthful passion and vigor.


in the stories of the dreamers, many native-born citizens  9 united states v.
wong kim ark, 169 u.


s.
649 (1898).


10 plyler v.
doe, 457 u.


s.
202 (1982).


11 ibid  88  journal on migration and human securityhave recognized echoes of their own immigrant ancestors stories (keyes 2013, 5,10).
the  dreamer narrative reinforces and builds upon the dual american meta-narratives of a  nation of immigrants and a land of opportunity.


at the same time, the dreamers have  consciously and consistently established themselves and their movement as the heirs to  the struggle for equality of civil rights era activists, staging provocative sit-ins and non- violent protests, marches and acts of civil disobedience.
channeling langston hughes  let america  be america again,  pulitzer  prize  winning  dreamer  and  activist  jose  antonio vargas came out as an unauthorized immigrant in the new york times in 2011,  saying, even though i think of myself as an american and consider america my country,  my country doesnt think of me as one of its own (vargas 2011).


the dreamers appeal  for inclusion is also grounded in ideas of american exceptionalism as a national mythology  that  typifies  achievement  against  all  odds  as  only  possible  in america  (keyes  2013,  10).
this sense of american exceptionalism, pervasive across the us political spectrum,  supports jus soli citizenship for the children of unauthorized immigrants because many  european nations do not grant citizenship rights to similarly situated children (ho 2006).


the initial wins of the dreamers have gone a long way toward undermining the argument  against jus soli citizenship for the children of unauthorized immigrants.
some have expressed  concern (keyes 2013) that the way in which dreamers appeal to their worthiness may  undermine the citizenship claims of other less worthy individualsshifting the collective  conception of belonging in ways that create winners and losers.


however, it seems that the  efforts of the dreamers have broadened the american understanding of who is really  american based on what ayelet shachar calls jus nexi, or citizenship based in rootedness.
in  shachars  assessment,  such  an  understanding  of  citizenship  would  align  ones  legal  status with the social fact of [ones] attachment (shachar 2007, 116).


this same concept  was echoed by president obama who said of the dreamers, they are americans in  their heart, in their minds, in every single way but one: on paper (obama 2012).
while  dreamers are still not americans on paper, the presidents recognition of their identity  gives critics of jus soli citizenship an increasingly heavy persuasive burden.


the effect of the struggle around jus soli citizenship in  the dominican republic while  the  dreamers  successes  show  the  dynamic  nature  of  public  willingness  to  redefine societal membership, the case of dominicans of haitian descent is instead a tale  of entrenchment.
recent legislative and administrative changes show a trend away from  inclusive  rights  recognition  and  toward  denial  of  citizenship  to  dominicans  of  haitian  descent.


pressure from the international community and an organized movement within the  dominican republic have tended to focus on the gap between existing legal protections and  their implementation.
even though jus soli citizenship was enshrined in the constitution,  civil  registry  offices  denied  nationality  to  dominicans  of  haitian  descent  before  this  practice became legal in 2004.


the 2010 constitutional revision excluding the children of  unauthorized immigrants from jus soli citizenship prohibits the retroactive application of  new citizenship laws, yet cases of retroactive application for persons suspected of haitian  ancestry persist.
89  citizen or subordinatewhen confronting implementation anomalies such as this, scholars have often argued that  the growing divide between citizens and non-citizens is primarily a problem of lapsed  enforcement of existing norms (goldston 2006).


yet, implementation does not invariably  shift  over  time  into  increasingly  faithful  compliance  with  that  law.
the  trend  in  the  dominican republic has been one of shifting over time to come closer and closer to a  discriminatory practice that was already well established, spreading and further cementing  it throughout the country.


the concept of denying jus soli citizenship to children of haitian descent ripened in a  political and cultural climate in which dominicanness was defined as the direct opposite  of haitianness.
historical tensions and fears have fueled both ad hoc and codified denial  and revocation of dominican citizenship.


exploited by mainstream political figures seeking  to capture populist and nationalistic zeal, the morality and consequences of citizenship  denials and revocation have received little scrutiny by the two dominant political parties.
within  this  political  climate,  the  dominican  government  has  responded  to  critiques  of  the gap between existing law and current practice by amending the law to reflect these  discriminatory practices.


because many nations respond to criticism of failed enforcement by moving in the opposite  directionby improving implementation of the law, not changing lawsthe tendency of  civil society within and outside of the dominican republic, as well as international bodies  like the organizations of american states, has been to frame their critique of the dominican  republics current citizenship regime in terms of a broader need for rule of law.
within this  perspective, they have urged the dominican government to better align the actual practices  of civil servants with the protections in the constitution.


the increasingly exclusionary  shifts within the dominican republic over the last decade show that it is an expanded  understanding of dominican identity, not an increased respect for rule of law, which will  be the primary driver of rights recognition and provision of citizenship over time.
the  movement  of  young  dominicans  of  haitian  descent,  many  of  whom  had  official  documentation before 2007, pursues this strategy by carrying out public actions and protests  (reconoci.


do 2011b) in pursuit of a more inclusive conception of national membership.
just  like  the  dreamers,  the  youth  movement  in  the  dominican  republic  has  used  individual testimonies (reconoci.


do 2011a) of particularly exceptional young people to  show the worthiness and essential dominicanness of the group.
the dreamers have  appealed to the unfairness of being punished for an act in which they had no part.


many  dominican youth of haitian descent also draw on values of fairness when they denounce  the  retroactive  application  of  laws  and  practices  that  suspended  or  revoked  documents  administered by and previously recognized by the dominican state.
while the dominican republic remains alarmingly hostile to these young people, a recent  split within the civil registry shows willingness by some officials to find a legal remedy to  the permanent limbo in which dominicans of haitian descent live (tejeda 2013).


similarly,  the young people recently began demanding that the president break his silence on the  issue of their denationalization, indicating a belief that if forced to speak, president danilo  medina would speak in their favor (batista 2013; reynoso 2013).
90  journal on migration and human securityconclusion jus  soli  citizenship  regimes  are  an  important  defining  characteristic  of  the  americas.


until recently, both the dominican republic and the united states had language in their  constitutions  which  conferred  jus  soli  citizenship  with  very  limited  exceptions.
both  struggle to respond to migratory flows of large numbers of unauthorized migrants.


despite  these similarities, the discourses around jus soli citizenship, particularly for the children  of unauthorized migrants from poorer neighboring countries, have manifested in radically  different ways.
in the united states, in response to rapid demographic change and an increase in unauthorized  immigration, restrictionist organizations and politicians have revived a largely settled legal  question  by  contesting  the  century-old  interpretation  of  the  fourteenth amendment  as  embodying an anti-caste or anti-subordination principle (rodrguez 2009, 1365).


critics  of universal jus soli citizenship have failed in their attempt to reinterpret the constitution,  and the citizenship of children of undocumented immigrants has never really been under  imminent  threat  in  the  united  states.
however,  the  presence  of  this  question  on  the  political agenda may make a multi-tiered system of intermediary statuses for unauthorized  immigrants more palatable.


in the dominican republic, on the other hand, ethnocentric  discriminatory practices for conferring citizenship at birth have been increasingly codified  into  law.
the  debate  over  jus  soli  citizenship  for  dominicans  of  haitian  descent,  also  centering on a previously settled legal question, has conversely served as a justification for  this evolution.


in both cases, the debates have at times been framed in nationality and racially neutral  language.
however,  the  everyday  consequences  have  disproportionately  been  felt  by  mexicans in the united states (van hook and fix 2010, 5) and haitians in the dominican  republic (wooding and moseley-williams 2004).


this is the result of geography, history  and  identity  politics.
the  resilience  of  these  dynamics  means  that  the  constitutional  constructs of citizenship in the united states [and the] dominican republicwill continue  to  function  under  the  tremendous  weight  of  each  societys  racial,  ethnic,  and  socio- economic biases(middleton and wigginton 2012, 541).


within this reality, the challenge  for  governments  is  to  operationalize  citizenship  regimes  independent  of  nationalistic,  ethnocentric, and racial biases (middleton and wigginton 2012, 541).
in the united states, jus soli citizenship debates often distract from the serious conversation  about reforming the ways in which immigrants are integrated into our society.


understood  in the context of the civil rights movement and reasoning behind the promulgation of the  fourteenth amendment, the jus soli debate is marginal and should remain so.
this proposal  would only increase the already high number of 11 million unauthorized us residents.


in the dominican republic, the implementation of the new citizenship regime, particularly  its retroactive application, exacerbates income inequality, illiteracy, family instability, and  public health threats, in addition to violating internationally recognized rights.
to prevent  these negative outcomes, the dominican republic should amend the 2010 constitutional  provisions regarding nationality to include children of unauthorized migrants, ensure that  the constitution and the general law on migration of 2004 are not applied retroactively,  repeal circular 017 and resolution 12, stop disseminating administrative guidelines that   91  citizen or subordinatecontradict existing law, develop effective implementation guidance to ensure that all persons  born in the dominican republic receive non-discriminatory access to identity documents,  and respect the jurisdiction of international bodies to which it belongs.


however,  recognizing  that  these  changes  are  unlikely  in  the  short  term,  civil  society  strategies should focus on confronting notions of national identity.
looking to the success  of  dreamers  and  their  allies  in  the  united  states  over  the  last  decade  in  redefining  concepts  of  belonging  and  membership  to  include  unauthorized  minors,  it  is  clear  that  identity politics can and do shift, at times rapidly.


organized movements of youth in the  dominican  republic  already  exist  and  may  present  the  best  chance  for  confronting  a  culture of segregation and exclusion.
despite significant differences between the contexts  of the two countries, the progress of the dream movement in the united states may offer  some of the best lessons for advocates and affected persons within the dominican republic  seeking to challenge the status quo.


