paths to lawful immigration  status: results and implications  from the person survey1  tom k.
wong uc san diego  donald kerwin  center for migration studies   jeanne m.


atkinson catholic legal immigration network, inc.
mary meg mccarthy national immigrant justice center            executive summary   anecdotal evidence suggests that a significant percentage of unauthorized  immigrants are potentially eligible for some sort of immigration relief, but  they either do not know it or are not able to pursue lawful immigration  status for other reasons.


however, no published study that we are aware  of  has  systematically  analyzed  this  question.
the  purpose  of  this  study  is thus to evaluate and quantify the number of unauthorized immigrants  who, during the course of seeking out legal services, have been determined  to be potentially eligible for some sort of immigration benefit or relief that  provides  lawful  immigration  status.


using  the  recent  implementation  of  the  deferred  action  for  childhood  arrivals  (daca)  program  as  a  laboratory  for  this  work,  this  study  attempts  to  answer  the  question  of  the  number  of  unauthorized  immigrants  who,  without  knowing  it,  may  already be potentially eligible for lawful immigration status.
in surveying  67  immigrant-serving  organizations  that  provide  legal  services,  we  find  that 14.


3 percent of those found to be eligible for daca were also found  to  be  eligible  for  some  other  form  of  immigration  reliefput  otherwise,  14.
3  percent  of  individuals  that  were  found  to  be  eligible  for  daca,  which provides temporary relief from deportation, may now be on a path  towards lawful permanent residency.


we find that the most common legal  remedies  available  to  these  individuals  are  family-based  petitions  (25.
5  percent), u-visas (23.


9 percent), and special immigrant juvenile status  (12.
6  percent).


these  findings  make  clear  thatwith  comprehensive   1  this study was made possible through the support of the john d.
and catherine t.


macarthur  foundation.
2014 by the center for migration studies of new york.


all rights reserved.
jmhs volume 2 number 4 (2014): 287-304immigration  reform  legislation  or  eligibility  for  administrative  relief   legal screening can have significant and long-lasting implications on the  lives of unauthorized immigrants and their families.


introduction over the past several decades, a comprehensive legislative response to the us unauthorized  population has eluded congress, successive administrations, and states and localities.
in the  113th congress (2013-2014), lawmakers again failed to pass comprehensive immigration  reform (cir) legislation that included an earned legalization program for unauthorized  immigrants.


2 congress has also repeatedly failed to pass more narrow legislation that would  legalize discrete groups of unauthorized immigrants, such as those who were brought to the  us as children and agricultural laborers.
3 within this context, the obama administration  has used its prosecutorial discretion to provide temporary relief from deportation, along  with work authorization, to an estimated 1.


8 million unauthorized immigrant youth via  the 2012 deferred action for childhood arrivals (daca) program.
4 at the end of 2014  the administration expanded its policy of deferred action to the unauthorized parents of  us citizens and lawful permanent residents (lprs) via the deferred action for parental  accountability (dapa) program.


the recent implementation of daca provides a laboratory to analyze one of the largest  immigrant legalization programs since the immigration reform and control act (irca) of  1986.
the lessons learned from daca are sure to inform dapa implementation, as well  as future legalization programs.


research on daca has thus far analyzed the demographic  profile  of  daca  applicants  with  an  eye  towards  the  under-representation  of  particular  immigrant  groups  (wong  et  al.
2013),  the  societal  incorporation  experiences  of  those  with daca (gonzales, terriquez, and ruszczyk 2014; wong and valdivia 2014), and the  civic engagement and political incorporation of dacamented millennials (wong and  valdivia 2014).


despite the important contributions of these studies, the perspectives and  experiences of immigrant-serving organizations that provide legal servicesorganizations  that are not only on the front lines of daca implementation, but will also likely be on  the front lines of any broader legalization programhave been absent from this emergent  literature.
anecdotal  evidence  based  on  the  experiences  of  immigrant-serving  organizations  that  provide legal services suggests that a significant percentage of unauthorized immigrants   2  whereas s.


744 was passed in the senate by a vote of 68 to 32, the bill was not voted on in the house of  representatives.
3  the impasse at the federal level has created opportunities for states and other localities to pass their own  legislation directed at unauthorized immigrants, including so-called self-deportation enforcement measures.


at the same time, other states and localities have passed measures that attempt to regularize and normalize  day-to-day life for unauthorized immigrants, for example, by allowing unauthorized immigrants to access  identification cards, drivers licenses, and in-state tuition.
combined, these laws, policies, and practices can  improve the lives of unauthorized immigrants, but they do not offer permanent status or long-term solutions  to the challenge of 11 million us unauthorized residents.


4  the administration has also used its prosecutorial discretion to ease enforcement pressures on unauthorized  immigrants in the nations interior who do not fit certain enforcement priorities.
288  journal on migration and human securityare potentially eligible for some sort of immigration benefit or relief, but either they do not  know it or are not able to pursue lawful immigration status for other reasons.


however,  no  published  study  of  which  we  are  aware  has  systematically  analyzed  this  question.
the purpose of this study is thus to evaluate and quantify the number of unauthorized  immigrants who, during the course of seeking out legal services, have been determined to  be potentially eligible for some sort of immigration relief that provides lawful immigration  status.


using the implementation of daca as the backdrop for this work, this study is  a  first  attempt  to  answer  the  question  of  the  number  of  unauthorized  immigrants  who,  without knowing it, may already be potentially eligible for lawful immigration status.
this  study has important implications for those who seek out legal services for deferred action,  as permanent immigration remedies may be available to many unauthorized immigrants in  addition to temporary relief from deportation.


in  a  national  survey  of  67  immigrant-serving  organizations  that  provide  legal  services,  we find that 14.
3 percent of those found to be eligible for daca were also found to be  eligible for some other form of immigration benefit or reliefput otherwise, 14.


3 percent  of individuals that were found to be eligible for daca, which provides temporary relief  from deportation, may now be on the path towards lawful permanent residency.
we find that  the most common legal remedies available to these individuals are family-based petitions  (25.


5  percent),  u-visas  (23.
9  percent),  and  special  immigrant  juvenile  status  (12.


6  percent).
these  findings  make  clear  thatwith  or  without  comprehensive  immigration  reform legislation or administrative relieflegal screening can have significant and long- lasting implications on the lives of unauthorized immigrants and their families.


unmet  needs:  connecting  unauthorized  immigrants  to  legal service providers  a growing body of literature has demonstrated the overwhelming need for legal services  and assistance in immigrant communities (for example, see bach, 1996; shannon 2009;  katzmann 2008, 2009; kerwin 2005).
to illustrate, one of the last major national legal  needs surveys conducted in immigrant communities was fielded in the early 1990s (bach  1996).


this study was based on a survey of 2,500 low-income households in los angeles,  new york, houston, miami, and chicago, all communities with relatively robust immigrant  service networks.
the survey found that while more than half of the households surveyed  had been involved in a legal status change, among these households, less than half had  received legal assistance in the process (bach 1996, 37).


this literature has also drawn  attention to the shortage of competent counsel for low-income immigrants (shannon 2009;  markowitz et al.
2011) and the important role that community-based organizations play  in ensuring high levels of participation in programs to change legal status (baker 1997;  campos 2014; gonzalez-barrera et al.


2013; hagan and baker 1993).
given  the  immense  unmet  legal  needs  of  low-income  immigrants,  national,  state,  and  local charitable legal service and community networks have made it a priority to build  immigrant  service  and  legal  capacity.


capacity  building  has  been  a  recurrent  theme  in  planning  discussions  related  to  the  implementation  of  broad  legalization  programs  like  daca, dapa and earned legalization (carson 2014; kerwin and laglagaron 2010), as   289  paths to lawful immigration statushas improving the quality of legal representation for immigrants more generally (katzmann  2008, 2009).
the  mobilization  and  coordination  of  immigrant-serving  organizations  has  also  proven  successful in increasing participation in legal status programs.


5 for example, a large-scale  naturalization campaign after the nationwide immigrant rights marches in 2006 led to a spike  in naturalization applications filed between 2006 and 2007 (from 730,642 to 1,382,993),  as well as a large increase in persons naturalized from 2007 to 2008 (from 660,477 to  1,046,539) (gonzalez-barrera et al.
2013, 30; see also wang and winn 2011).


yet, the  need for sustained work by immigrant-serving organizations that provide legal services  remains acute.
for example, 9.


7 million immigrants who were eligible for naturalization  in 2011 had not yet naturalized, with particularly low naturalization rates among eligible  mexican  nationals  (gonzalez-barrera  et  al.
2013,  11).


moreover,  while  nearly  600,000  young people are now dacamented, this represents just under half of those who are  currently eligible for daca.
6  research in this area has also illustrated the striking differences that legal representation  makes in case outcomes (katzmann 2008; ramji-nogales, schoenholtz, and schrag 2009;  trac  2014).


these  studies  have  largely  concentrated  on  political  asylum-seekers  in  us  immigration  courts,  although  they  have  also  covered  cases  in  removal  proceedings  involving  immigration  relief  of  different  kinds  and  cases  before  us  citizenship  and  immigration services (uscis).
one study concluded that legal representation is the single  most important factor affecting political asylum outcomes (ramji-nogales, schoenholtz,  and schrag 2009, 45).


not surprisingly, studies have also concluded that the quality of  legal representation matters.
thus, high-quality, time-intensive representation leads to high  approval rates (ramji-nogales, schoenholtz, and schrag 2009), while poor representation  negatively influences case outcomes (markowitz et al.


2011, 23-27).
additional findings  include:    47 percent of represented unaccompanied minors from fy 2005 to fy 2014 were  allowed  to  stay  in  the  united  states,  compared  to  10  percent  of  unrepresented  unaccompanied minors during the same period (trac 2014);    25 percent of represented asylum-seekers from fy 2000 and fy 2004 who were  arrested at or near the us-mexico border and initially subject to expedited removal  were granted asylum, compared to 2 percent for unrepresented asylum-seekers in  this situation (kuck 2004, 239);    39 percent of non-detained, represented asylum-seekers in fy 2003 prevailed in  their claims in immigration court, versus 14 percent of non-detained, unrepresented  asylum-seekers (kerwin 2004, 6, 11-12);      18  percent  of  detained,  represented  asylum-seekers  in  fy  2003  were  granted  asylum, compared to 3 percent for detained, unrepresented asylum-seekers (ibid.


);   87 percent of non-detained, represented persons seeking adjustment to lpr status in  fy 2003 were successful, compared to 70 percent for non-detained, unrepresented   5  see baker 1997 and hagan and baker 1993 for examples related to irca.
see campos 2014 for more  recent examples.


6  as of july 2014, 587,366 initial daca applications had been approved.
this represents 41 percent of the  potentially eligible population of 1.


7 million (see batalova et al.
2014).


290  journal on migration and human securitypersons (ibid.
);    41 percent of detained, represented persons seeking adjustment to lpr status in fy  2003 were successful, compared to 21 percent for detained, unrepresented persons  (ibid.


);    46 percent of represented asylum-seekers in immigration court from january 2000  to august 2004 received asylum, compared to 16 percent for unrepresented asylum- seekers (ramji-nogales, schoenholtz, and schrag 2009, 45);    41 percent of uscis asylum applicants with legal counsel from fy 2000 to fy  2003 were granted asylum, compared to 24 percent of uscis asylum applicants  without legal counsel during the same period (ibid.
, 260);    74  percent  of  represented,  non-detained  cases  from  october  2005  to  july  2010  in new york immigration courts had successful case outcomes, compared to 13  percent for unrepresented, non-detained cases during the same period (markowitz  et al.


2011, 19-20);    18  percent of  represented detainees achieved successful outcomes in  new york  immigration  courts  from  october  2005  to  july  2010,  compared  to  3  percent  of  unrepresented detainees during the same period (ibid.
).


as these findings make clear, legal representation is an important determinant of positive  immigration case outcomes.
our analysis below further demonstrates that, in the context  of  daca,  access  to  legal  services  and  assistance  is  also  an  important  determinant  of  identifying the many paths to lawful immigration status that may exist for some unauthorized  immigrants.


the person survey in order to empirically evaluate the extent to which daca-eligible youth are also potentially  eligible for other immigration benefits or forms of relief, we conducted a nationwide survey  of immigrant-serving organizations that provide legal services during the late summer and  early fall months of 2014the potential eligibility for relief survey of non-profits, or  person survey.
sponsored by the center for migration studies of new york (cms), the  catholic legal immigration network, inc.


(clinic), and the national immigrant justice  center (nijc), our online survey used a snowball sampling method that relied on the dense  networks of immigration legal service providers supported by or otherwise known to the  sponsoring organizations.
sixty-seven organizations representing 24 states plus the district of columbia completed  the  survey.


the  bulk  of  organizations  that  responded  to  the  survey  are  from  illinois  (12  organizations),  california  (9),  and  new york  (8).
when  comparing  states  that  are  represented in the survey with states that are not, we see that our sample is comprised of  states with statistically significantly larger estimated unauthorized populations (p = .


036)  and statistically significantly larger numbers of estimated daca-eligible youth (p = .
056).


regarding the characteristics of the organizations themselves, there is significant variation  in their experience, as measured by number of years in operation, and their capacity, as  measured by number of paid staff.
experience ranges from one year in operation to 103  years in operation with a median of 28 years.


capacity ranges from one paid staff to 104  paid staff with a median of seven.
this variation provides leverage to evaluate how the   291  paths to lawful immigration statusefficacy of legal screening varies by the experience and capacity of the organizations we  surveyed.


results since  daca  was  first  announced  on  june  15,  2012,  the  organizations  we  surveyed  combined  to  screen  a  total  of  126,154  individuals  without  lawful  status.
of  this  total,  30,733 or 24.


4 percent were daca-related cases.
in other words, among the organizations  surveyed over 30,000 persons walked in the door for daca.


of course, not all of these  individuals were found to be eligible for deferred action.
of the 30,733, 19,095 or 62.


1  percent of these daca-related cases were, in fact, found to be eligible for daca.
the  legal remedies available to this particular subset of individuals constitute the primary focus  of the analysis below.


we also note that 56.
0 percent of non-daca cases on which the  surveyed  organizations  worked  were  found  to  be  potentially  eligible  for  some  form  of  immigration relief (more on this in the recommendation section).


5  having identified the total number of daca-eligible youth that each of the organizations  we surveyed screened, we then asked, among the individuals who were judged to be  potentially eligible for daca, approximately how many of these individuals were also  judged  to  be  potentially  eligible  for  other  immigration  benefits  or  forms  of  relief?
in  response, the organizations in our sample reported identifying a combined 2,727 individuals  who were eligible for daca and some other immigration benefit or form of relief.


in other  words, 14.
3 percent of those who walked in the door for daca were not only found to be  potentially eligible for deferred action, but were also judged to be potentially eligible for  some other immigration benefit or form of immigration relief.


figure 1 graphically depicts  this result.
what specific immigration remedies have these organizations identified for these 2,727  individuals?


to answer this question, we asked the organizations to indicate the percentage  breakdown of eligibility for non-daca immigration remedies based on a menu of different  forms of immigration relief.
6 as figure 2 shows, the most common immigration remedies  identified  for  these  individuals  are  family-based  petitions  (25.


5  percent),  followed  by  u-visas (23.
9 percent) and then special immigrant juvenile status (12.


6 percent).
as noted  above, these alternatives provide potential paths to permanent residency (e.


g.
, a green card)  and citizenship.


5   the five most common legal remedies available in non-daca cases were special immigrant juvenile  status  (18.
3  percent),  asylum  or  related  protection  (14.


8  percent),  family-based  petitions  (14.
6  percent),  adjustment  (10.


5  percent),  and  cancellation  of  removal  (9.
4  percent).


the  high  percentage  of  special  immigrant juvenile status and asylum or related protection cases are due mostly to an outlier organization.
removing the outlier leads to family-based petitions (20.


2 percent), cancellation of removal (14.
9 percent),  adjustment  (14.


1  percent),  daca  (13.
6  percent),  and  consular  processing  (11.


8  percent)  as  the  leading  categories.
whereas 23.


9 percent of those eligible for daca and some other form of immigration relief were  found to be potentially eligible for a u-visa, 8.
0 percent of non-daca cases were found to be potentially  eligible for a u-visa (9.


6 percent if the outlier is excluded).
it is also interesting to note that 3.


2 percent (4.
4  percent excluding the outlier) of individuals were found to be potentially eligible for derivative citizenship.


6   this menu included, in alphabetical order, adjustment, asylum or related protection, cancellation of  removal (only applicable if individual is in immigration court), consular processing, derivative citizenship/ naturalization, employment-based visa, family-based petition, non-immigrant visa, special immigrant  juvenile status, t-visa, u-visa, vawa, and other.
292  journal on migration and human securityfigure 1  figure 2  293  paths to lawful immigration statusthat 14.


3 percent of those found to be eligible for daca were also found to be potentially  eligible for some other immigration benefit or form of relief is an especially significant  finding  given  the  large  number  of  estimated  daca-eligible  youth  across  the  country.
9   however,  we  caution  that  a  wholesale  generalization  of  this  14.


3  percent  figure  to  the  entire daca-eligible population, or even to the broader unauthorized population, would  be unwise.
because a probability-based survey of all attorneys who work on immigration  cases,  immigration  legal  service  providers,  and  organizations  that  serve  unauthorized  immigrants is currently not possible (this entire universe is not known and the number of  unauthorized immigrants who find a path to lawful status and proceed pro se would also  need to be taken into account), nationally generalizable survey results are currently not  obtainable.


methodological limitations notwithstanding, the import of our main finding  remains intact.
moreover, while no publicly available data of which we are aware can definitively tell us  whether our main finding represents an upper or lower bound, we can confidently state  that among the organizations we surveyed, 14.


3 percent of those found to be eligible for  daca were also found to be potentially eligible for some other immigration benefit or  form of immigration relief.
our main finding can thus be used as a heuristic for future  daca-related outreach, as well as for outreach related to dapa and any other legalization  program.


experience and capacity are  organizations  with  more  experience  or  greater  capacity  more  likely  to  identify  alternative immigration remedies for daca-eligible youth?
to answer this question, we  analyze the relationship between the characteristics of the organizations we surveyed and  the percentage of individuals that each organization identified who were eligible for daca  and some other immigration benefit or form of immigration relief.


to recall, among the  organizations surveyed, experience ranges from one year in operation to 103 years and  capacity ranges from one paid staff to 104.
the analysis proceeds as follows.


first, we examine the bivariate relationship between the  experience of an organization and the count of the total number of individuals identified  as being eligible for daca and some other immigration benefit or form of relief (y1a).
we  then examine the bivariate relationship between the experience of an organization and the  number of individuals identified as being eligible for daca and some other immigration  benefit or form of relief as a percentage of all individuals identified as being eligible for  daca (y1b).


given the non-normal distribution of experience across all of the organizations  surveyed, we analyze both the total number of years in operation (x1a) and the natural log  of the total number of years in operation (x1b).
second, we examine the bivariate relationship between the capacity of an organization, as  measured by total number of paid staff, and y1a and y1b.


because capacity is also not normally  distributed across the organizations that we surveyed, we analyze both the total number of  paid staff (x2a) and the natural log of the total number of paid staff (x2b).
lastly, we test the  9  according to the immigration policy center (2012), roughly 1.


8 million people are either immediately  eligible for daca or will become eligible in the future.
294  journal on migration and human securityeffect of experience and capacity in a multivariate model that accounts for contextual factors  related to social capital that are likely to impact the ability of unauthorized immigrants to  access legal services or assistance in the context of a legalization program (baker 1997;  hagan and baker 1993; meissner and papademetriou 1988; ong hing 1992).


these are  the natural log of the total non-citizen population in the cities that the organizations we  surveyed are located, the percentage of the non-citizen population that entered before 2010,  the percentage of the non-citizen population that does not speak english very well, and  the percentage of the non-citizen population that lives below the poverty line.
these data  come from the american community survey (acs) 2012 five-year estimates.


we note that  because more nuanced and granular data on the unauthorized immigrant population are  currently not widely available (or reliable) at low levels of geography (e.
g.


, cities) and for  places with small populations, we use data from the acs on the non-citizen population as  proxies for the characteristics of the unauthorized.
figure 3  as figure 3 shows, there is no statistically significant relationship between experience and  the efficacy of legal screening.


as the figure shows, the relationship between the number of  years in operation and the count of individuals identified as being eligible for daca and   295  paths to lawful immigration statussome other immigration benefit or form of relief (y1a) is statistically insignificant.
this is  true for both the total number of years in operation (p = .


467) and the natural log of the total  number of years in operation (p = .
782).


moreover, while there is a positive relationship  between experience and the number of individuals identified as being eligible for daca  and some other immigration benefit or form of relief as a percentage of all individuals  identified as being eligible for daca (y1b), this relationship is not statistically significant.
this is true for both the total number of years in operation (p = .


100) and the natural log of  the total number of years in operation (p = .
237).


in  contrast,  as  figure  4  shows,  there  is  a  statistically  significant  relationship  between  capacity and the efficacy of legal screening.
as the left column of the figure shows, the  relationship between the number of paid staff and the count of individuals identified as  being  eligible  for  daca  and  some  other  immigration benefit  or  form  of  relief  (y1a)  is  statistically significant.


this is especially true for the natural log of the total number of paid  staff (p = .
011).


moreover, there is also a positive and statistically significant relationship  between capacity and the number of individuals identified as being eligible for daca  and some other immigration benefit or form of relief as a percentage of all individuals  identified as being eligible for daca (y1b), as illustrated in the right column of the figure.
this is also especially true for the natural log of the total number of paid staff (p = .


027).
figure 4  296  journal on migration and human securitydoes the effect of capacity hold when taking into account other factors?


to answer this  question,  we  now  turn  to  the  multivariate  analysis.
table  1  reports  the  results  of  the  analysis of the count of individuals identified as being eligible for daca and some other  immigration benefit or form of relief (y1a).


as the table shows, the effect of capacity,  when measured by the natural log of the total number of paid staff, remains significant in  the  multivariate  models.
put  otherwise,  greater  capacity  means  that  organizations  are  able  to  identify  a  greater  number  of  individuals  who  are  both  eligible  for  daca  and  some other immigration benefit or form of relief.


this result holds when accounting for  contextual factors related to the social capital of unauthorized immigrants that are likely  to impact the ability of unauthorized immigrants to access legal services or assistance.
table 1.


modeling the count of persons found eligible  for daca and other immigration benefits  years in operation (ln)  paid staff (ln)  total noncitizen population (ln)  % noncitizen population entered before 2010  % noncitizen population does not speak english well  % noncitizen population below poverty line  model 1 -.
207 (.


166) .
530*** (.


183)  model 2 -.
220 (.


167) .
478*** (.


187) .
014 (.


088) .
006 (.


085) .
007 (.


022) -.
009 (.


025)  negative binomial regressions.
standard errors in parentheses.


** significant at the .
05  level.


*** significant at the .
01 level.


table  2  reports  the  analysis  of  the  number  of  individuals  identified  as  being  eligible  for daca and some other immigration benefit or form of relief as a percentage of all  individuals identified as being eligible for daca (y1b).
as the table shows, the effect of  capacity remains generally significant in the multivariate models.


whereas the effect is  highly statistically significant in model 3, the impact of capacity just misses conventional  levels of statistical significance in model 4.
297  paths to lawful immigration statustable 2.


modeling percentage of persons found eligible for other  immigration  benefits  (i.
e.


,  eligible  for  daca  and  other  benefit   divided by eligible for daca)  years in operation (ln)  paid staff (ln)  total noncitizen population (ln)  % noncitizen population entered before 2010  % noncitizen population does not speak english well  % noncitizen population below poverty line  model 1 1.
352 (2.


351) 4.
628** (2.


327)  model 2  .
756 (2.


628) 4.
052 (2.


568) .
813 (1.


399) .
301 (1.


047) -.
039 (.


279) .
104 (.


399)  ols regressions.
standard errors in parentheses.


** significant at the .
05 level.


***  significant at the .
01 level.


recommendations our findings make clear that, just as there are many paths into illegality, there are also  many paths to lawful status.
although obstacles such as cost and accessibility, among others,  limit the ability of unauthorized immigrants to seek out and obtain legal services, doing so  can potentially mean the difference between living in the shadows and lawful permanent  residency.


this will certainly not be the case for all.
10 however, as the data showand as  the experiences of immigration legal service providers attest the line demarcating lawful  and unauthorized status is often a fluid one, particularly when immigration law intersects  the lived experiences of unauthorized immigrants (for example, see jasso et al.


2008).
we  end this article by making several recommendations.


to the extent possible, unauthorized immigrants should seek out competent legal services.
because we recognize that we risk stating the obvious, we add additional layers of depth  to this recommendation.


daca has provided a laboratory for our empirical research, as  the program has given unauthorized youth and their families a reason to seek out legal  services and thus an opportunity to potentially access other immigration benefits and forms  10  as  many  unauthorized  immigrants  may  have  previously  pursued  legal  services  and  assistance  (it  is  not  uncommon  to  hear  about  individuals  or  families  spending  thousands  of  dollars  on  several  different  immigration attorneys over the course of many years), it is important to note that while one may not have  been eligible for some form of immigration relief in the past, one could, as with a u-visa, become eligible  at a later point in time.
298  journal on migration and human securityof immigration relief.


however, our recommendation extends beyond the daca-eligible  population.
indeed, many paths to lawful immigration status exist not only for unauthorized  youth, but also for the broader unauthorized population.


to recall, our survey shows that since daca was first announced, 56.
0 percent of the  combined total number of non-daca cases on which the organizations we surveyed worked  were found to be potentially eligible for some immigration benefit or form of immigration  relief.


to be clear, this should not be interpreted to mean that over half of the unauthorized  population  in  the  united  states  has  a  path  to  lawful  permanent  residency.
rather,  the  experiences of immigration legal service providers suggest that a selection effect exists,  wherein unauthorized immigrants who already believe that they are potentially eligible  for some form of immigration relief are more likely to seek out legal support.


this means  that the broader unauthorized population is less likely to walk in the door of immigration  legal service providersthese may be the individuals for whom legal screening is most  important.
of course, this begs the question of how to increase access to legal services and assistance.


here,  federal,  state,  local,  and  private  philanthropic  initiatives  that  increase  the  legal  capacity of immigrant-serving organizations, as well as initiatives that support low-income  immigrants,  should  be  substantially  expanded.
whereas  the  experience  of  daca  has  proven the success of such initiatives, the recent announcement of the larger-scale dapa  program now magnifies their importance.


moreover, it is likely that, if congress were to  pass legalization legislation, persons with deferred action would be treated favorably.
it is important to be mindful that unauthorized immigrants are often easy prey for bogus  or incompetent attorneys, notarios, scam artists, and other bad actors who take advantage  of immigrants limited knowledge of us law, lack of english fluency, and lack of cultural  knowledge to charge exorbitant fees for wild promises of green cards and citizenship that  the bad actors cannotor in some cases never intended todeliver (shannon 2009, 557;  see also katzmann 2008; langford 2004; shannon 2011).


we thus propose two potential firewalls to the exploitation of unauthorized immigrants  as they seek out legal services.
the first is ethnic media.


ethnic media, particularly spanish  language media, has played an important role in daca implementation (wong et al.
, 2013).


just as ethnic media have highlighted stories of dacamented youth, we encourage ethnic  media to highlight stories of unauthorized youth who walked in the door for daca but  left with a path to permanent residency as a result of legal screening.
and, just as ethnic  media have warned individuals about fraudulent notarios in reporting about the process of  applying for daca, so too can it do so when encouraging unauthorized immigrants to seek  out legal services.


community-based organizations (cbos) are a second firewall.
scholars of immigrant  incorporation  have  shown  that  cbos  can  facilitate  the  social,  economic,  and  civic  incorporation of immigrant groups (for example see campos 2014; desipio 2001; marrow  2005; ramakrishnan and bloemraad 2008; wong 2006).


given the important roles that  they play in immigrant communities, we encourage cbos to use their platforms as trusted  messengers to not only convey information about potential paths to lawful immigration  status beyond dacaand that such paths may exist even in the absence of comprehensive   299  paths to lawful immigration statusimmigration reform legislation or eligibility for administrative reliefbut also to direct  unauthorized immigrants to competent immigration legal service providers.
we also urge cbos to expand their legal expertise and capacity by becoming us department  of justice (doj) board of immigration appeals (bia) recognized organizations and by  training  their  non-attorney  staff  to  become  bia  accredited  representatives.


federally- accredited representatives can represent immigrants who are seeking immigration benefits  before us citizenship and immigration services and, if particularly qualified, can provide  legal representation before the executive office for immigration review (eoir) (e.
g.


, in  immigration court).
our second set of recommendations is directed towards immigrant-serving organizations  that  provide  legal  screening  services.


a  subset  of  these  organizations  provides  legal  screening  during  the  course  of  daca  clinics  or  workshops.
many,  if  not  most,  have  created intake forms for basic legal screening, but this screening is often limited to daca  eligibility requirements.


thus, to the extent possible, and in partnership with experienced  immigration attorneys or accredited representatives, we encourage cbos to expand the  depth of their legal screening (based on our empirical findings) regarding eligibility for  other immigration benefits or forms of relief.
to be clear, this is not to suggest that cbos  that lack the legal expertise and capacity should begin taking on complex cases.


cbos  should continue to refer complex cases to immigration attorneys.
rather, it is to encourage  cbos  that  provide  legal  screening  for  daca  and  plan  to  provide  legal  screening  for  dapa to use these opportunities to identify other immigration benefits and relief that may  be available to the immigrants that they serve.


current  circumstances  lend  added  importance  to  this  need.
as  unauthorized  youth  and  their families have sought out legal service providers solely because of daca, a concern  exists that should persons be deemed ineligible for deferred action based on limited legal  screening, these individuals may not seek out immigration legal services againat least  not until a new executive action is announced or new immigration legislation is passed.


because not all immigration legal service providers offer the same depth of legal screening,  many of these recommendations also apply to established legal service providers during  their normal office intake or case screening.
moreover, as the results make clear, the capacity of immigrant-serving organizations is a  critical variable.


it is important for at least two main reasons.
capacity can mean having the  legal experience and expertise necessary to translate comprehensive legal screening into  concrete steps towards applying for an immigration benefit or form of relief.


it can also  mean having the necessary staff hours to engage with those who seek legal screening and  services.
this is critically important, as some of the immigration remedies discussed here  require detailed conversations that delve into difficult and emotional issues.


for example,  a u-visa requires, in part, that a person be a victim of certain crimes and have suffered  substantial physical or emotional abuse as a result.
moreover, special immigrant juvenile  status is intended for young persons who have suffered abuse, abandonment, or neglect.


in  both examples, a brief and sometimes hurried conversation with an unauthorized immigrant  who  does  not  know  that  these  immigration  remedies  exist  is  unlikely  to  result  in  such  sensitive information being shared.
we recognize that it is not possible for immigrant-service  organizations that provide legal services to add capacity without resources.


however, by   300  journal on migration and human securitycombining the insights gained from our empirical findings with their own on the ground  experiences, it is our hope that organizations can leverage their existing capacity in a way  that provides them with the greatest opportunities to connect unauthorized immigrants with  the immigration benefits and relief that may be available to them.
our final recommendations are made with an eye towards dapa implementation and any  potential future grand bargain immigration legislation that includes the legalization of  unauthorized immigrants.


as mentioned at the outset, daca represents one of the largest  immigrant legalization programs in the united states since irca in 1986.
but while the  580,859 people that had received daca as of june 2014 is certainly an impressive number,  it  represents  only  a  small  percentage  of  the  total  estimated  unauthorized  population.


while daca has provided a laboratory for us to examine empirically the extent to which  unauthorized immigrants are eligible for some form of immigration relief, preparations for  a larger legalization program should not be limited to simply scaling up based on lessons  learned from daca implementation.
a broader legalization program that is more inclusive than daca, such as dapa, will  bring  a  larger  cross-section  of  the  unauthorized  populationas  well  as  their  diverse  experiences  and  complex  immigration  historiesto  the  doors  of  immigrant-serving  organizations that provide legal services.


it is important to emphasize that many paths to  lawful status will continue to exist for many unauthorized immigrants in addition to the  specific eligibility criteria of dapa and any future legalization program.
thus, immigrant- serving organizations should partner with immigration attorneys or legal service providers  to  identify  the  range  of  immigration  remedies  that  may  potentially  be  available  to  the  particular  cross-section  of  the  unauthorized  population  that  the  program  serves,  design  intake and screening processes accordingly, and, to the extent possible, address issues of  capacity with an eye towards the provision of comprehensive legal screening.


conclusion using the recent implementation of daca as a laboratory for our work, this study is the  first to attempt to answer the question of the number of unauthorized immigrants who,  without knowing it, may already be potentially eligible for lawful immigration status.
in a  nationwide survey of 67 immigrant-serving organizations that provide legal services, we  find that 14.


3 percent of those found to be eligible for daca were also found to be eligible  for some other form of immigration reliefput otherwise, 14.
3 percent of individuals that  were found to be eligible for daca, which provides temporary relief from deportation,  may now be on the path towards lawful  permanent residency.


we have every reason to believe that this phenomenon will persist with dapa.
our analysis  suggests that comprehensive legal screening can potentially mean the difference between  discovering a path to lawful permanent residency and citizenship, and continued life in  the shadows or only a temporary reprieve from removal.


thus, while it is often framed  in political terms, our research suggests that the legalization of unauthorized immigrants  can also be framed as an access to justice issue, particularly for those who may be eligible  for lawful permanent residency, but do not know it or are unable to access legal services  or assistance.
for these unauthorized immigrants, legalization need not wait for executive   301  paths to lawful immigration statusactions such as daca or dapa, or even comprehensive immigration reform legislation.


daca and dapa will continue to lead many to walk in the door of immigrant-serving  organizations that provide legal servicesorganizations should thus view each of these  interactions  as  opportunities  to  identify  paths  to  legal  permanent  residency  for  the  immigrants they serve.


