the promise of a subject-centered  approach to understanding  immigration noncompliance   emily ryo1   university of southern california  executive summary unauthorized  immigrants  and  immigration  enforcement  are  once  again  at  the  center  of  heated  public  debates  and  reform  agendas.
this  paper  examines  the  importance  of  applying  a  subject-centered  approach  to  understanding  immigration  noncompliance  and  to  developing  effective,  ethical, and equitable immigration policies.


in general, a subject-centered  approach  focuses  on  the  beliefs,  values,  and  perceptions  of  individuals  whose behavior the law seeks to regulate.
this approach has been widely  used in non-immigration law contexts to produce a richer and more nuanced  understanding of legal noncompliance.


by contrast, the subject-centered  approach has been an overlooked and underappreciated tool in the study  of immigration noncompliance.
this paper argues that a subject-centered  understanding  of  why  people  obey  or  disobey  the  law  has  the  potential  to generate new insights that can advance public knowledge and inform  public policy on immigration in a number of important ways.


specifically,  the paper considers how the use of this approach might help us: (1) recognize  the  basic  humanity  and  moral  agency  of  unauthorized  immigrants,  (2)  appreciate not only direct and immediate costs of immigration enforcement  policies, but also their indirect and long-term costs, and (3) develop new  and innovative strategies to achieving desired policy goals.
introduction across  many  areas  of  law,  researchers  have  long  accepted  the  basic  notion  that  to  understand why people obey or disobey the law, we ought to understand the perspectives  and experiences of individuals whose behavior the law seeks to regulate.


this subject- centered approach to the study of legal noncompliance has produced a rich body of research  across  many  different  areas  of  law    as  wide-ranging  as  illegal  littering  (grasmick,  bursik, and kinsey 1991), illegal fishing (gezelius 2002), juvenile delinquency (fagan  and tyler 2005), neighborhood violence (kirk and papachristos 2011), and white-collar  crime (soltes 2016).
in this paper, i suggest that a subject-centered approach is an often  overlooked  and  underappreciated  tool  in  the  study  of  immigration  noncompliance,  and   1   i thank rachel yang for her excellent research assistance, and greg keating, donald kerwin, and nomi  stolzenberg for their insightful comments.


2017 by the center for migration studies of new york.
all rights reserved.


jmhs volume 5 number 2 (2017): 285-296that this approach to understanding why people obey or disobey the law has the potential  to generate new insights that can advance public knowledge and inform public policy on  immigration in a number of important ways.
to be clear, i am not suggesting that a subject- centered approach ought to replace other approaches to the study of legal noncompliance  in immigration law (or in any other area of law).


rather, my argument is that in light of the  unique knowledge and insight that a subject-centered approach can provide, this approach  should be adopted more widely to complement non-subject-centered approaches.
the remainder of this paper will develop this argument in three parts.


the first part discusses  some of the basic features of a subject-centered approach, and key challenges to employing  this approach.
the second part examines the application of a subject-centered approach in  studies of legal noncompliance in tax and criminal law, respectively, in order to illustrate  the versatile use of this approach across the civil-criminal law divide.


my goal is to provide  a broad context for thinking about the utility of a subject-centered approach, and to show  that this approach has been used in varying ways across many different areas of law to  enhance public knowledge and produce policy-relevant findings.
finally, i conclude by  outlining some of the significant benefits to using this approach to understand immigration  noncompliance.


my discussion of these expected benefits centers around the following  three key points that i further elaborate in this paper.
first, i show that a subject-centered approach can play an important role in helping us  to  recognize  the  basic  humanity  and  moral  agency  of  unauthorized  immigrants.


this  recognition, in turn, is a critical foundation for developing immigration policies that are  informed by international human rights norms, rather than by the immigrants-as-criminals  trope, which lacks empirical basis but is often used to fuel public anxiety and fear.
2 second,  i discuss the ways in which a subject-centered approach can help us to better appreciate not  only direct and immediate costs of immigration enforcement policies, but also their indirect  and long-term costs.


although these indirect and long-term costs may be more difficult to  measure, their potential implications for governance and system legitimacy are significant.
third,  i  consider  how  a  subject-centered  understanding  of  immigration  noncompliance  can foster new and innovative strategies to achieving desired policy goals.


for example,  my prior study indicates that unauthorized labor migration arises not from the immigrants  lawlessness or disrespect for the rule of law, but from their belief that unauthorized migration  constitutes the only morally-acceptable response to economic exigencies that threaten their  ability to perform legal and honorable work in support of their families.
this finding  would suggest that a focused developmental strategy that promotes job opportunities in  key sending communities is more likely to reduce noncompliance than expending the same  resources to produce threats of criminal punishment or to build a physical barrier along the  us-mexico border.


i.
subject-centered approach a subject-centered approach requires researchers to place their research subjects perceptions  and experiences at the center of their investigative focus and analysis.


a number of scholars   2   for a summary of studies that show that popular assumptions of immigrant criminality lack empirical  basis, see ryo (2015).
286  journal on migration and human securityhave  expressly  recognized  the  importance  of  applying  subject-centered  approaches  to  understand  diverse  and  wide-ranging  social  phenomena.


for  example, yasemin  besen- cassino (2008, 352), in her study of youth labor in the united states, explains that [w] hile  youth  employment  has  been  studied  extensively  from  the  perspectives  of  parents,  educators, and policy-makers, the central actors  young people themselves  have been  relatively neglected and young peoples motives behind work remain virtually unexplored.
besen-cassino (2008, 360) argues that exploring the youths perspectives advances our  understanding of not only those individuals decision-making process about work, but the  way in which they make sense of their work and the alternative functions [that] work  fulfills for them.


likewise, min zhou and colleagues (zhou et al.
2008; see also lee and zhou 2014; zhou  2015) expressly acknowledge the importance of using a subject-centered approach in their  study of immigrant assimilation.


according to zhou et al.
(2008, 42), the process of social  mobility is complex and multifaceted and .


.
.


mechanisms leading to divergent outcomes  depend largely upon how structural and cultural exigencies affect subjects and how subjects  respond or react to those exigencies.
thus, zhou et al.


(2008, 42) argue that a subject- centered approach that attends to immigrants perceptions, and definitions of mobility and  success, will enable us to better understand both the obvious and subtle reasons [why]  members of the second generation make certain choices and pursue particular pathways  to social mobility.
while there is temptation to strictly equate subject-centered approaches with qualitative  methods  like  ethnography  or  open-ended  interviews,  i  suggest  that  subject-centered  approaches are pluralistic and often times agnostic, with respect to methodology.


to be  sure, quantitative methods such as closed-ended surveys are less adept at capturing in depth  the inner world of research subjects than qualitative methods like open-ended interviews.
however, surveys typically enable researchers to more easily capture the perspectives of  a  significantly  larger  sample  of  individuals.


given  these  tradeoffs  between  quantitative  and qualitative methods, researchers have often deployed both types of methods, either  simultaneously or sequentially, to obtain a more holistic picture of the complex dynamics  underlying  the  social  or  legal  phenomenon  at  issue.
whatever  the  researchers  chosen  methodology, subject-centered approaches can present daunting challenges.


for example,  these  approaches  often  require  time-  and  resource-intensive  field  research.
researchers  may encounter substantial hurdles to gaining access to subject populations of interest if  those  populations  are  hidden  from  public  view.


researchers  may  also  face  formidable  obstacles to establishing the mutual understanding and trust necessary for meaningful data  collection, especially if the members of the subject population occupy marginalized or  vulnerable positions in society.
in  the  next  section,  i  turn  to  research  on  criminal  law  and  tax  law  to  illustrate  how  scholars have deployed subject-centered approaches to produce richer and more nuanced  understandings of legal noncompliance in those disparate areas of law.


my goal is not to  offer a comprehensive review of the vast and growing bodies of research in these two areas  of law.
nor do i mean to suggest that immigration noncompliance is in any way analogous  or similar (legally or morally) to criminal or tax noncompliance.


rather, my goal is simply  to illustrate in relatively broad strokes the ways in which subject-centered approaches have  become an important device across both criminal and civil law domains.
287  the promise of a subject-centered approachii.


applications in criminal law and tax law a long line of research has focused on the question of why people obey or disobey the law  (see, e.
g.


, meier and johnson 1977; grasmick and bryjak 1980; maccoun 1993; jackson  et al.
2012; tyler and jackson 2014).


the dominant models of legal noncompliance   from  the  instrumental  model  to  the  procedural  justice  model    are  perceptual  models  at their core.
these models focus on, for example, how people perceive the certainty of  apprehension and severity of sanctions (nagin 1998; paternoster 2010), or how people  perceive the legitimacy of law or legal authority regulating their conduct (tyler [1990]  2006;  mazerolle  et  al.


2013).
3  researchers  have  responded  to  the  subjective  nature  of  inquiries required to test these models by collecting and analyzing a voluminous array of  empirical data on the legal attitudes and legal experiences of individuals subject to the law.


below, i highlight a few of these studies in criminal law and tax law contexts, respectively,  to illustrate these studies diverse range, scope, and methodology.
4  in  criminal  law  research,  scholars  have  long  recognized  that  to  ignore  or  minimize  the value of [offenders] views and opinions of criminal law and policies because of  distrust of their honesty and motives is to risk failing to obtain invaluable information from  those in a position to offer unique and unanticipated insights (larson and berg 1989).


for example, it was only through surveying nearly 300 criminal inmates across a number  of  prisons  and  jails  that  david anderson  (2002)  was  able  to  demonstrate the  extent  to  which criminal offenders made uninformed decisions about whether to engage in criminal  behavior.
anderson asked on the survey, when you committed this crime, how likely did  you think it was that you would be caught?


and when you committed this crime, did you  know what the likely punishment would be if you were caught?
andersons analysis of the  responses to these survey items showed that 76 percent of active criminals and 89 percent  of the most violent criminals in the study, respectively, had not thought about either the risk  of apprehension or the likely punishments at the time of their offending.


eugene soltes (2016) reached a similar conclusion in his study of former executives who  had been convicted of white-collar crimes such as insider trading, violations of financial  reporting requirements, and pyramid schemes.
drawing on in-depth interviews with almost  50 former executives, soltes (2016, 5) sought to place [himself] in their positions and to  understand the world as they saw it.


by adopting this subject-centered approach, soltes  was able to dispel the myth of the mastermind, which presumes that white-collar crime  is  a  product of  careful cost-benefit analysis.
contrary  to  this  myth,  soltes  showed  that  white-collar crime was more a result of failures in intuition and gut instincts, as well as the  executives inability to appreciate the human suffering and harm caused by their corporate  malfeasance.


soltes (2016, 6) explained, [w]hile manipulative corporate conduct has the  same financial effect as stealing money from an investors wallet, there is a crucial difference   3   models of legal compliance have also become more complex over the past several decades as researchers  have sought to develop more realistic theories that explicitly take into account aspects of human behavior that  challenge standard assumptions of neoclassical economics (see jolls, sunstein, and thaler 1998 [discussing  bounded rationality, bounded willpower, and bounded self-interest]).
4   i focus on us studies for the purposes of my exposition, though there are many studies in this body of  research that focus on non-us contexts (see, e.


g.
, hucklesby 2009 [examining factors underlying compliance  with electronically-monitored curfew orders among criminal offenders in england]; wenzel 2004 [examining  the impact of social norms on tax compliance among australian citizens]).


288  journal on migration and human securitybetween these types of crime from the perspective of the perpetrator.
according to soltes  (2016), stealing money from anothers pocket involves a high degree of intimacy .


.
.


but  manipulative corporate conduct lacks all these sensations associated with theft.
executives  never need to get close  physically or psychologically  to their victims.


subject-centered  approaches  have  also  broadened  our  understanding  of  the  complex  dynamics underlying tax noncompliance.
5 a great deal of this research has focused on the  importance of tax morale  what marjorie kornhauser (2007, 139) refers to as the  collective name for all the non-rational factors and motivations  such as social norms,  personal  values  and  various  cognitive  processes    that  strongly  affect  an  individuals  voluntary  compliance  with  laws.


subject-centered  approaches  have  been  critical  to  uncovering the nature and operation of tax morale subtypes.
for example, stalans, kinsey,  and smith (1991) investigated how people form beliefs about sanctions and norms about  tax compliance by conducting a survey of 1,200 residents in minnesota.


this study found  that communication with coworkers lowered the perceived likelihood of apprehension and  the severity of sanctions for tax evasion, whereas communication with family members  increased  the  perceived  fairness  of  tax  laws  and  positive  personal  norms  about  tax  compliance.
onu and oats (2016) also studied the importance of social communication and social norms  on tax compliance, but they relied on an in-depth discourse analysis.


their analysis focused  on 120 interactions between professional web designers on online forums, in which the  professionals sought one anothers advice on their tax obligations.
onu and oats study  revealed active social influence processes in tax communication  processes that had been  ignored in past studies based on the assumption that taxpayers were passive transmitters  of information to each other.


onu and oats found that the study samples professionals,  most of whom were self-employed and thus obligated to voluntarily report their income  tax, actively influenced and persuaded each other to comply with tax laws, using a range  of known persuasion techniques in their discussions.
these persuasion techniques ranged  from stating the benefits of compliance, to threats and warnings of the consequences of  tax evasion.


onu and oats (2016, 38) concluded that while the former set of techniques  generally  yielded  responses  that  were  supportive  of  tax  compliance,  the  latter  set  of  techniques generated more defiant responses, especially when those techniques referred to  the coercive power of tax authorities.
taken together, both bodies of research  research on criminal offending and research on  tax evasion  suggest that subject-centered approaches have played a key role in advancing  our knowledge of the relative importance of complex social dynamics, such as community  norms, perceptions of the legitimacy of the law, and moral judgments, that underlie legal  noncompliance.


these advances have challenged, complicated, and extended traditional  deterrence models that have focused almost exclusively on instrumental factors such as  expected economic costs and benefits of noncompliance.
5   for recent reviews of tax compliance studies, see khlif and achek (2015), pickhardt and prinz (2014), and  devos (2013).


289  the promise of a subject-centered approachiii.
understanding immigration noncompliance what might a subject-centered understanding of immigration noncompliance look like, and  what might be the relevance and implications of such an understanding for policymaking?


a  growing  but  still  a  small  number  of  studies  have  examined  immigrants  experiences  with and the impacts of immigration law from the immigrants perspective (see, e.
g.


, ryo  2006; gleeson 2010; abrego 2011; gonzales 2011; menjvar and abrego 2012; rodrguez  and hagan 2014; menjvar and lakhani 2016).
6 in a related but a distinct line of inquiry,  i  adopted  a  subject-centered  approach  to  explore  immigration  noncompliance  among  current  and  prospective  unauthorized  immigrants  in  the  united  states  (ryo  2013;  ryo  2015; ryo 2017).


consistent with the discussion above that a subject-centered approach  is not synonymous with specific research methods, i have relied on both qualitative and  quantitative methods, as appropriate, to examine the perspectives, beliefs, and motivations  of individuals who are subject to us immigration laws and policies.
for example, in deciding to cross, i collected and analyzed a large-scale survey in mexico  with individuals who were considered to be at risk of engaging in unauthorized migration  into the united states (ryo 2013).


my findings showed that in addition to certain economic  cost-benefit calculations, prospective immigrants normative values, such as their moral  sensibilities and their perceptions about the legitimacy of immigration laws and authorities,  were significantly related to their intentions to cross the border illegally.
7 in a companion  piece, less enforcement, more compliance, i explored the nature of these normative values  based on group interviews with immigrants at the us-mexico border and in the interior  of  the  united  states  (ryo  2015).


my  analysis  in  less  enforcement,  more  compliance  yielded several insights about the immigrants normative values and their role in individual  decisions to engage in unauthorized migration.
below, i briefly underscore two key findings  that emerged from that study.


first,  i  found  that  the  immigrants  viewed  themselves  as  law-abiding  individuals  who  valued legal order and respected national sovereignty notwithstanding their violations of  us immigration law.
underlying this self-perception were certain value orientations and  moral imperatives.


for example, in discussing their decisions to cross the border illegally,  the immigrants commonly emphasized structural forces that were beyond their individual  control, such as the collapse of their national or local economies, and crop failures.
faced  with  these  structural  forces  brought  on  through  no  fault  of  their  own,  the  immigrants  viewed their migration decision as the only morally appropriate way to fulfill their deeply- felt personal responsibility to provide for their families, and their commitment to legal  and honorable work.


moreover, the immigrants viewed immigration noncompliance as  morally distinct from other kinds of noncompliance such as criminal law violations.
from  their perspective, the former type of noncompliance allowed them to perform work that  helped to build the us economy, whereas the latter type of noncompliance engendered  clear harm at the individual and societal level.


6   there are also studies that engage in subject-centered analyses of the spillover effects of immigration  policies on community members who are not the direct targets of the policies but are nonetheless impacted by  those policies; these community members include, for example, border region residents and us-born latinos  (see, e.
g.


, heyman 2013; quiroga, medina, and glick 2014).
7    more  recently,  i  used  a  survey  to  examine  the  legal  attitudes  of  immigrant  detainees,  and  found  that  the detainees procedural justice perceptions were significantly related to their reported willingness to obey  immigration authorities (ryo 2017).


290  journal on migration and human securitysecond,  my  analysis  showed  that  the  immigrants  viewed  the  current  us  immigration  system  (in  terms  of  both  its  admission  and  its  enforcement  policies  and  practices)  as  neither in alignment with their expressed moral values nor legitimate.
prominent in the  immigrants  narratives  were  discussions  of  the  various  ways  in  which  the  current  us  immigration system violated fundamental notions of equality and fairness by operating in  biased, hypocritical, and arbitrary ways.


for example, the immigrants often described the  us immigration system as a business or a lottery, in which only the lucky few won  visas to enter the united states legally.
these beliefs about the lack of system transparency,  predictability,  and  rule-based  qualities,  together  with  the  immigrants  expressed  moral  values  undergirding  their  decisions  to  migrate,  formed  a  powerful  normative  basis  for  enabling  noncompliance.


moreover,  these  findings  provide  a  nuanced  account  of  why  unauthorized immigrants might engage in a particularized rather than a generalized form of  noncompliance  that is, why they might violate us immigration law but not other laws.
in sum, the foregoing discussion suggests that subject-centered approaches can generate a  fuller and more complex perspective on immigration noncompliance.


why might we want such a deeper understanding of immigration noncompliance?
there  are at least three reasons.


first, legal discourse and political debates about unauthorized  migration and immigration enforcement policies in the united states are largely divorced  from discussions of human rights.
this is in large part due to the deeply-held and widely- accepted notion that nation-states have an absolute and unfettered right to determine who  may enter and stay in their territories (cole 2006; lpez 2006).


but what are the limits,  if any, to this self-determination principle, and what does a just and ethical immigration  policy  require  for  those  seeking  to  enter,  for  those  already  in  the  united  states,  and  for those whom the government seeks to expel?
more specifically, what does a liberal  democracys  professed  commitment  to  and  respect  for  every  individuals  human  rights  demand in terms of its immigration policy?


8 grappling with these questions requires first  recognizing the basic humanity and moral agency of immigrants.
fundamental to such a  recognition is the understanding of immigrants not as passive objects of state control, but  as individuals who are capable of normative judgments about the law and legal authorities,  and whose actions are guided by their value judgments and shared social beliefs about what  is right and appropriate given their situations (see ryo 2015; ryo forthcoming).


subject- centered approaches are uniquely situated to foster this understanding, given their focus on  the immigrants voices and lived experiences as they confront, acquiesce in, or resist the  existing systems of governmental control that restrict their cross-border movement.
second,  i  suggest  that  subject-centered  approaches  can  produce  knowledge  that  may  focus our attention on not just the direct and immediate costs of immigration enforcement  policies, but also their indirect and long-term costs.


for example, immigration detention  has become an increasingly important enforcement tool in the united states  a tool that  the former secretary of the department of homeland security has described as an effective  deterrent to unauthorized migration (preston 2014).
there is little evidence that detention  actually  deters  unauthorized  migration  (sampson  2015).


but  emerging  research  does  suggest that there are significant short-term costs of maintaining this system of detention,  as well as long-term societal costs that may be harder to measure but are equally significant  8   for in-depth discussion and debate on these questions, see, e.
g.


, bosniak (2006), carens (2013), wellman  and cole (2011).
291  the promise of a subject-centered approach(ryo 2016; ryo 2017; ryo forthcoming).


for example, my study based on survey and  in-depth interviews with long-term immigrant detainees suggests that various structural  and interactional factors in detention might work together to engender widespread legal  cynicism among the detainees (ryo forthcoming).
by legal cynicism, i mean a deep sense  of distrust of us laws and legal authorities, and skepticism about the us legal systems  commitment to the rule of law.


because immigrant detainees are individuals embedded  in  domestic  and  transnational  networks,  they  have  the  potential  to  widely  disseminate  delegitimating beliefs about the us legal system and authorities.
such an outcome, i argue,  has significant negative implications for democracy and governance in the long run.


third, subject-centered approaches may help us to consider new and innovative strategies  to achieving desired policy goals.
for example, a longstanding body of research in other  areas of law shows that laws that are incongruent with peoples moral values are bound  to generate widespread noncompliance.


my study of unauthorized migration suggests that  immigration law faces a similar challenge.
as i discussed earlier in this paper, current and  prospective unauthorized immigrants do not view violations of us immigration law as  immoral.


on the contrary, the immigrants in my study considered such violations to be the  only viable morally-permissible option given their desire to work to support their families  (ryo 2015).
in light of these findings, temporary worker programs that facilitate circular  migration with transparency and predictability (rather than at the whim of a given political  party in power), or focused development strategies that promote job opportunities in key  sending communities, may promote expectations among current and prospective immigrants  that there are viable, legal avenues of fulfilling their expressed moral obligations to support  their families through work.


these shared expectations in turn will likely encourage timely  return migration among current immigrants, as well as motivate prospective immigrants to  wait to enter legally rather than attempt to cross illegally.
conclusion the purpose of this paper has been to explain the importance of subject-centered approaches  to understanding immigration noncompliance, and to present a case for why we should  care  about  the  views  of  unauthorized  immigrants.


that  unauthorized  immigrants  are  nonmembers to our polity in the legal sense does not lessen the importance of attending to  their voices.
understanding their beliefs, values, and perceptions may help us to recognize  their basic humanity and moral agency  an important first step toward a concrete and  critical  engagement  with  the  idea  that  immigrant  rights  are  human  rights.


i  have  also  argued that we should care about the views of unauthorized immigrants because doing so  may help us to appreciate the indirect and long-term costs of our enforcement policies, and  to engage in a broader range of public discussions about how we might promote greater  voluntary compliance.
in these ways, adopting subject-centered approaches to the study  of immigration noncompliance may have an important role to play in the development of  effective, ethical, and equitable immigration policies.


