mass deportations would  impoverish us families and  create immense social costs  robert warren  center for migration studies  donald kerwin  center for migration studies   2014.
executive summary this  paper  provides  a  statistical  portrait  of  the  us  undocumented  population,  with  an  emphasis  on  the  social  and  economic  condition  of  mixed-status households  that is, households that contain a us citizen and  an undocumented resident.


it is based primarily on data compiled by the  center for migration studies (cms).
major findings include the following: 	 there were 3.


3 million mixed-status households in the united states in   	 6.
6 million us-born citizens share 3 million households with undocu- mented residents (mostly their parents).


of these us-born citizens, 5.
7  million are children (under age 18).


2.
9 million undocumented residents were 14 years old or younger when   they were brought to the united states.


three-quarters of a million undocumented residents are self-employed,  having created their own jobs and in the process, creating jobs for many  others.
a total of 1.


3 million, or 13 percent of the undocumented over age 18,   have college degrees.
of those with college degrees, two-thirds, or 855,000, have degrees in  four fields: engineering, business, communications, and social sciences.


six million undocumented residents, or 55 percent of the total, speak   english well, very well, or only english.
the  unemployment  rate  for  the  undocumented  was  6.


6  percent,  the   same as the national rate in january 2014.
1   	 seventy-three percent had incomes at or above the poverty level.


sixty-two percent have lived in the united states for 10 years or more.
their median household income was $41,000, about $12,700 lower than   the national figure of $53,700 in 2014 (us census bureau 2015).


1   source: national conference of state legislatures, national monthly employment update (data from  the bureau of labor statistics).
http://www.


ncsl.org/research/labor-and-employment/national-employment- monthly-update.
aspx.


2017 by the center for migration studies of new york.
all rights reserved.


jmhs volume 5 number 1 (2017): 1-8based on this profile, a massive deportation program can be expected to  have the following major consequences:  	 removing  undocumented  residents  from  mixed-status  households  would reduce median household income from $41,300 to $22,000, a drop  of $19,300, or 47 percent, which would plunge millions of us families  into poverty.
if  just  one-third  of  the  us-born  children  of  undocumented  residents  remained in the united states following a mass deportation program,  which is a very low estimate, the cost of raising those children through  their minority would total $118 billion.


the nations housing market would be jeopardized because a high per- centage of the 2.
4 million mortgages held by households with undocu- mented immigrants would be in peril.


gross domestic product (gdp) would be reduced by 1.
4 percent in the first  year, and cumulative gdp would be reduced by $4.


7 trillion over 10 years.
cms derived its population estimates for 2014 using a series of statistical  procedures  that  involved  the  analysis  of  data  collected  by  the  us  census bureaus american community survey (acs).


the privacy of all  respondents in the survey is legally mandated, and, for the reasons listed  in the appendix, the identity of undocumented residents cannot be derived  from the data.
a detailed description of the methodology used to develop  the estimates is available at the cms website.


2    introduction this paper provides a demographic analysis of the potential impact on us families and  children of large-scale deportation of us undocumented residents.
during his candidacy,  president trump vowed to deport all 11 million us undocumented residents.


after the  election,  he  seemed  to  moderate  his  position,  pledging  to  deport  two  to  three  million  undocumented  criminals  (a  wildly  exaggerated  number),  to  complete  2,000  miles  of  walls  and  fencing  along  the  us-mexico  border  and,  after  the  immigration  situation  normalized, to determine what to do about the terrific and great people without status.
if  president  trump  no  longer  intends  to  try  to  deport  all  11  million  undocumented  residents, it would be a positive development.


a program to legalize a large percentage  of  the  undocumented  would  make  even  more  sense.
yet,  trump  has  never  disavowed  his  earlier  pledge  to  deport  11  million  persons  and,  in  a  january  25  executive  order,  set  exceedingly  broad  enforcement  priorities  and  vowed  to  [e]nsure  the  faithful  execution  of  the  immigration  laws    against  all  removable  aliens.


in  addition,  he  may  yet  rescind  and  certainly  does  not  seem  poised  to  extend  the  deferred action  for  childhood  arrivals  (daca)  program,3  much  less  commit  to  a  legalization  program.
2   go to http://data.


cmsny.org/about.
html.


3   daca is a quasi-legalization program established in june 2012 that provides a temporary reprieve from  removal  and  employment  authorization  to  certain  undocumented  residents  who  arrived  as  children.
the   2  journal on migration and human securitythe paper details the characteristics of us undocumented residents, and how their removal  would affect us families (primarily mixed-status families) and the children (both us citizen  and undocumented) in these families.


in addition, it summarizes the likely negative effects of  a mass removal program on the housing market and on us gross domestic product (gdp).
4  undocumented residents in 2014  as  a  result  of  the  relatively  low  numbers  of  arrivals  in  recent  years,  the  length  of  residence  of  the  undocumented  population  continues  to  increase.


in  2014,  62  percent  had lived in the united states for 10 years or more, and that rate will continue to rise  as long as arrivals remain at relatively low levels.
of course, longer residence leads to  increasing ties with the us population, including increasing numbers of us-born children.


in  this  section,  we  begin  with  a  description  of  the  total  undocumented  population  and  then shift the focus to mixed-status households  that is, households with at least one us  citizen and one undocumented resident.
mixed-status households are emphasized primarily  because the possibility of deportation and its attendant social and economic disruptions can  generate immense hardship for millions of us citizen residents who are entitled to a level  of security and opportunity consistent with their rights as citizens.


the total undocumented population   referring to the undocumented population with a single number  11 million  raises the  specter of a large, unknown, and frightening group of people who are sometimes referred  to as living in the shadows.
however, the portrait becomes more familiar upon closer  examination.


for example, of the 5.
3 million households with undocumented residents, 2.


8  million, or 53 percent, are home to 5.
7 million us-born children.


5 of the 7.
6 million undocumented residents in the labor force, three-quarters of a million  are self-employed, having created their own jobs and in the process creating jobs for many  others.


about 1.
4 million undocumented persons carpool, three times the rate of native- born residents.


a total of 1.
3 million, or 13 percent of those over age 18, have college degrees.


of those,  two thirds, or 855,000, have degrees in four fields: engineering, business, communications,  and social sciences.
of the 11 million undocumented residents, six million, or 55 percent,  speak  english  well,  very  well,  or  only  english.


about  66  percent  have  access  to  the  internet.
by many of these measures, a sizeable proportion of the undocumented residents  are indistinguishable from the general population.


daca-eligible have extensive and longstanding ties to the united states (kerwin and warren 2016).
4   gross domestic product (gdp) is the value of all finished goods and services produced in a specified  period.


5   the figure of 6.
6 million includes only the us-born (of any age) who lived in households with undocumented  residents in 2014.


us-born children of undocumented parents who have established separate households (that  do not include undocumented residents) could not be estimated and so are not included in the 6.
6 million  figure.


3  mass deportations would impoverish us families and create immense social costseconomically, undocumented residents were doing reasonably well in 2014:   	 their unemployment rate was 6.
6 percent, the same as the national rate in january   2014.


6   	 seventy-three percent had incomes at or above the poverty level.
median household income was $41,000, about $12,700 lower than the national   figure of $53,700 in 2014 (us census bureau 2015).


finally, it should be noted that 2.
9 million, or 27 percent of this population, did not choose  to be undocumented.


they arrived with their parents when they were less than 15 years of  age.
mixed-status households the examination of mixed-status households allows us to measure some of the possible  negative  consequences  for  us  citizens  who  live  with  the  possibility  that  any  day  an  undocumented resident in the household could be apprehended, detained, and deported.


the fear of deportation looms largest, but there are other factors that can impact the well- being of us citizens in these households.
for example, parents with undocumented status  may be reluctant to attend meetings at their childrens schools or to apply for benefits to  which their children are legally entitled.


household income is likely to be reduced when  undocumented residents do not seek better jobs or fail to petition for better wages and  working conditions for fear of retaliatory firings.
undocumented residents living in households with us citizens  the us undocumented population can be divided into two groups: (1) those who live in  households with us citizens, and (2) those who do not.


in 2014, there were a total of 5.
3  million households with undocumented residents, and us citizens lived in just over 3.


3  million of them.
we examined the characteristics of both types of households.


the percent  for households with us citizens is listed first in the bullets below.
undocumented residents who live in households with us citizens:  	 have lived in the united states longer (69 percent vs.


50 percent for more than   10 years);  speak english about equally well (54 percent vs.
56 percent speak english well,  very well, or only english);  	 are less likely to have attended college (23 percent vs.


35 percent); 	 are more likely to have incomes below the poverty level (32 percent vs.
20 per-  	  cent);  	 have a slightly higher unemployment rate (6.


8 percent vs.
6.


3 percent); and 	 are less likely to have health insurance coverage (38 percent vs.
42 percent).


6   source: national conference of state legislatures, national monthly employment update (data from  the bureau of labor statistics).
http://www.


ncsl.org/research/labor-and-employment/national-employment- monthly-update.
aspx.


4  journal on migration and human securityit might be surprising that undocumented residents who share households with us citizens  generally do less well economically than households without any us citizens.
however,  more of the former live in poverty, their unemployment rate is slightly higher, and they are  less likely to have health insurance coverage.


in 2014, about 5.
7 million us-born children  (under age 18) lived in households with undocumented residents, outnumbering the 1.


1  million undocumented children in those households by a ratio of 5 to 1.
in addition to fear that their parents could be deported and the family divided, the 5.


7  million us citizens living in households with undocumented residents face the possibility  that their households income could fall sharply if a parent or other worker in the household  were deported.
to determine the effects of that eventuality, we first compiled the median  income of households with a mix of undocumented residents and us citizens.


then, we  recomputed  the  median  household  income  but  omitted  the  income  of  undocumented  residents.
the median household income fell from $41,300 to $22,000, a drop of $19,300  or 47 percent, and below the 2016 federal poverty line of $24,300 for a family of four.


repeating the exercise but focusing on family units, median income fell from $36,000 to  $18,000, a drop of 50 percent.
these findings underlie how important it is  to the security and well-being of 5.


7 million  us citizen children  that their families remain intact and that their parents be able to  secure legal status.
us citizens in households with undocumented residents  the  previous  discussion  described  the  characteristics  of  us  undocumented  residents  and discussed the effects of their deportation on us citizen children and other household  members.


this section focuses exclusively on the us citizens themselves in households  with at least one undocumented resident.
in 2014, a total of 6.


6 million7 us citizens were living in households with undocumented  residents.
of those, about 5.


7 million were under age 18, and 865,000 were age 18 and  over.
an unknown number of us-born children of undocumented residents are adults who  do not live in households with their parents.


there are only a few characteristics that permit comparisons between the total undocumented  population and the us citizens who live in households with undocumented residents.
the  percent or number for us citizens is listed first.


as would be expected, the us citizens speak excellent english: 95 percent speak   english well, very well, or only english, compared to 55 percent of all undocu- mented residents.
most of the us citizens have health insurance coverage (87 percent vs.


39 per-  cent).
the median income of the households with us citizens is just slightly lower than   the median for the total undocumented population ($40,000 vs.


$41,000).
7   the figure of 6.


6 million exceeds the 5.
7 million number cited elsewhere because it includes nearly a  million  adult  us  citizens  who  live  in  households  with  undocumented  residents.


in  some  cases,  it  might  include us citizens who live in these households but are unrelated to the undocumented residents.
5  mass deportations would impoverish us families and create immense social costs	 removing the undocumented residents from these households would reduce me-  dian household income from $40,000 to $20,000, a reduction of 50 percent.


as shown in table 1, removing the undocumented residents from these households, and  thus reducing median income by 50 percent, could reduce the amount of financial support  available to their us-born children remaining in the united states by a total of $118 billion.
5,735,000     us-born children in households with undocumented residents  table 1.


estimated loss of financial support for us-born  children due to mass deportation 1 2 3 4 5 6  6=1x2x3x4x5  50%    percent of child support provided by undocumented residents9  33.
3%    assumes one-third of us-born children would remain in the us  $118,003,500,000     loss of financial support for us-born children if mass deportation  52.


9%    adjustment for average number of years of support needed per child8  $233,610     estimated cost of raising a child to age 18 (lino 2017)  broader national implications the consequences of mass deportation would not be limited to legal household members and  the us-born children of undocumented residents.
there would be nationwide repercussions.


for example, the adverse effects would likely spill over into the entire us housing market   about 2.
4 million, or 45 percent, of the 5.


3 million households that have undocumented  residents have mortgages.
10 8   in a recent study of the relationship between deportations and  foreclosures, rugh and hall (2016) found that unauthorized status leads to a chain of  events from deportation, lost household income, foreclosure, and ultimately, lost wealth.


their analysis is the first to propose and detect the effect of immigrant deportations on  latino  foreclosures.
the  primary  findings  were  that  deportations  exacerbate  rates  of  foreclosure among latinos by removing income earners from owner-occupied households  and local immigration enforcement plays an important role in understanding why latinos  experienced foreclosures most often.


mass deportation would have a major negative effect on the national economy.
edwards  and  ortega  (2016)  used  cms  estimates  of  the  us  undocumented  resident  population,  along with other data, to project the nationwide impact of a mass deportation program.


they concluded that a policy of mass deportation would immediately reduce the nations  8    this  adjustment  takes  into  account  the  varying  ages  of  the  us-born  children.
first,  we  computed  the  median  age  of  the  children  who  live  in  households  with  undocumented  residents,  which  was  8.


0  years.
that  means  that,  on  average,  9.


0  years  of  additional  childrearing  would  be  needed  for  each  child.
item  2  in  table  1  was  computed  as  follows:  9.


0  divided  by  17.
0  years  =  52.


9  percent.
the  financial  support  of  us-born  children  of  undocumented  9  this  assumes  residents  residents.


this  the  final  estimate.
10  in the 3.


3 million mixed-status households, about 1.
7 million, or about 50 percent, of the mortgages  would be at risk.


is  being  provided  by  undocumented   residents  and  the  effect  of   is  a  conservative  estimate   the  reducing   that  half  of   that  has   rest  by   legal   6  journal on migration and human securitygdp by 1.
4 percent, and ultimately by 2.


6 percent, and reduce cumulative gdp over 10  years by $4.
7 trillion.


conclusions and recommendation this report demonstrates that the social and economic status of millions of us citizens  would  be  substantially  jeopardized  by  a  massive  deportation  program.
deportation  of  undocumented  residents  in  mixed-status  households  would  decrease  household  income  by about 50 percent.


in addition, if just one-third of the us-born children remained in the  united states after their parents were deported, the total financial burden of raising the  children would be $118 billion.
mass deportation would also result in high default rates  for the 2.


4 million mortgages held by households with undocumented immigrants and, as  a result, would undermine the us housing market.
in addition, according to one study, the  nations gdp would be reduced by an estimated $4.


7 trillion over 10 years.
authors rugh and hall (2016) conclude their study of the effects of deportations on the  housing market on a cautionary note which is consistent with the analysis set forth in this  paper:   as the country prepares for the possibility of increased enforcement and mass  deportations, the lessons learned from this analysis take on new meaning and  have increased relevance.


policymakers and advocates would be wise to consider  the wide-reaching repercussions of enforcement for individuals, families, and  communities, both in the short and long terms.
in these circumstances, the papers overarching policy recommendation is to keep mixed- status us families intact, whether through executive action or, far better, a legalization  program for their undocumented members.


appendix the identity of individual undocumented residents cannot be derived from the cms data  for the following reasons:  	 the us census bureau is required by law to take steps to make sure no individu- al can be identified in survey data: it removes all identifying personal information  and other statistical operations  income capping, data switching, etc.
before  releasing the data.


the survey covers only one out of every hundred people.
the legally resident foreign-born population outnumbers undocumented resi-  dents in every state and the district of columbia, making it extremely unlikely  that individuals or groups of undocumented residents can be distinguished from  other foreign-born residents or foreign visitors.


in the 10 states with the lowest  numbers of undocumented residents, more than 90 percent of the foreign-born  population consists of legal residents, and no community has only undocumented  residents.
7  mass deportations would impoverish us families and create immense social costs	 the cms estimates are restricted to areas with population sizes of 100,000 or  more.


in a population that large, individuals or small groups of undocumented  residents will be indistinguishable from all other residents, including legal for- eign-born residents and foreign visitors.
the cms estimates are no longer publicly available below the state level.


