facing immigration fears: a  constructive local approach  to day labor, community, and  integration1  sandra lazo de la vega university of florida  timothy steigenga florida atlantic university   executive summary as one of the most visible and vulnerable manifestations of the presence  of latino immigrants in new destination communities across the united  states, day laborers have become a locus of conflict over the past fifteen  years for local policy makers, advocacy organizations, and neighborhood  residents.
communities have dealt with day labor in drastically different  ways.


some  have  passed  harsh  anti-immigrant  ordinances,  hoping  that  a hostile environment will encourage immigrants to leave.
restrictionist  state  and  local  legislation,  however,  has  proven  costly  to  enforce,  has  been challenged in court, and has hindered immigrant integration.


other  communities have gone against the restrictionist tide.
this paper argues  that organized day labor centers, such as the el sol resource center in  jupiter, florida, address many of the fundamental fears that polarize local  policymaking  and  the  national  immigration  reform  debate.


in  jupiter,  el sol has not only eliminated a controversial open-air labor market by  bringing  the  process  into  a  formal  and  organized  structure,  it  has  also  provided access to english and civics classes, preventive health screenings  and legal services in cases of wage theft.
furthermore, through el sol the  town of jupiter has opened a two-way process of immigrant integration.


jupiters day laborers are no longer hiding in the shadows, but rather are  engaging in active citizenship and working with native-born community  volunteers to run the center.
1 portions of this article are redacted from lazo de la vega, sandra and timothy j.


steigenga.
2013.


against  the  tide:  immigrants,  day  laborers,  and  community  in  jupiter,  florida.
madison,  wi:  university  of  wisconsin press.


2013 by the center for migration studies of new york.
all rights reserved.


jmhs volume 1 number 1 (2013): 1-16introduction in early 2012 the prospects for the passage of comprehensive immigration reform in the  united  states  looked  as  bleak  as  they  had  ever  been.
despite  promises  to  address  the  issue  in  his  first  term,  president  obama  continued  to  ramp  up  enforcement  hoping  to  convince his critics that he was serious about border control.


the first four years of the  obama  administration  saw  record  levels  of  deportations  (nearly  400,000  per  year)  and  unprecedented  enforcement  efforts  such  as  the  expansion  of  the  secure  communities  program.
2 at the state level, according to the national conference of state legislatures  1,607 immigration-related bills were introduced in 2011 (up from 1,400 the year before).


alabama (hb 56), georgia (hb 87), indiana (sb 590), south carolina (s 20), and utah  (hb 497 and sb 288) passed laws similar to arizonas sb 1070 (national council of state  legislatures 2012).
together, these federal, state, and local self-deportation initiatives  dominated the countrys immigration agenda.


as the dust from the 2012 presidential election settled, one fact appeared abundantly clear;  the ground had fundamentally shifted on the issue of immigration reform.
the latino vote  as a percentage of the overall electorate increased from 9 percent in 2008 to 10 percent  in 2012.


according to the exit polls, president obama won 71 percent of the latino vote  nationally, improving upon his 2008 performance of 67 percent (lopez and taylor 2012).
the  latino  vote  was  a  key  component  of  obamas  winning  coalition  in  several  swing  states,  including  colorado,  florida,  nevada,  and  even virginia.


politicians  and  pundits  from  across  the  political  spectrum  have  taken  notice  and  the  conventional  wisdom  on  comprehensive immigration reform shifted from impossible to very likely.
even  as  discussion  has  turned  from  an  exclusive  focus  on  enforcement  toward  reform  and  a  potential  path  to  citizenship  for  certain  unauthorized  immigrants,  a  gaping  hole  remains in the national immigration dialogue on the issue of immigrant integration.


while  congress debates the details of how much immigrants will be fined, how long they must  wait, or which back-taxes they must pay, little attention has been paid to the vehicles and  processes necessary to facilitate the integration of millions of immigrants into communities  around the country.
in other words, while there is much political maneuvering over how to  negotiate the legal inclusion of previously unauthorized immigrants into the united states,  questions about if, when, and how unauthorized immigrants will be socially included in  american society have yet to be addressed.


the  road  to  immigrant  integration  confronts  important  obstacles,  particularly  in  new  destination communities that have pursued restrictive policies that drive wedges between  the  native-born  and  latino  immigrants.
while  congress  may  pass  comprehensive  immigration  reform,  this  would  not  thereby  eliminate  the  fears  and  images  that  the  rancorous  immigration  debate  has  fostered.


though  many  of  the  estimated  11  million  unauthorized people living in the united states are, as the president recently emphasized,  american in every way, but on paper, there are also many who are not.
in new destination   2   secure communities is an information-sharing program between the dhs and the fbi.


ice states that  secure communities prioritizes the removal of criminal aliens who are the most dangerous and violent  offenders.
however, according to dhs, in 2011 twenty-nine percent of those deported were convicted of  minor or level 3 crimes resulting in sentences of less than one year.


twenty-six percent of those deported  had no criminal convictions (see waslin 2011).
2  journal on migration and human securitycommunities, unauthorized immigrants are frequently more recent arrivals who have lower  socio-economic profiles and remain segregated (both spatially and socially) from the rest  of the community.


this is not because they reject american society, but because they live  in places where they are feared, not easily accepted, and actively made to feel unwelcome.
while immigrant integration is a multi-faceted process that extends beyond the scope of  this article, we focus on the barrier of common fears about immigrants, how those fears  are frequently manifested in new destinations for latino immigrants, and the costly and  divisive restrictionist policies that foment and exacerbate such fears.


this article examines  the case of the town of jupiter, florida where fears about immigrants have been mitigated  through an organized day labor center.
we argue that community centers such as the el sol  neighborhood resource center3 in jupiter represent examples of what remains missing in  the national immigration discussion: integrative policies to provide a physical location and  institutional mechanism at the local level where fears about immigrants can be overcome  so that the two-way process4 of immigrant integration can begin to take place.


new destinations and fears about new immigrants over the past 20 years, latino immigrants have increasingly settled and found work in  what immigration scholars now call new destinations.
these are places that, unlike the  traditional immigrant gateway cities of los angeles, chicago and new york, have had  little previous experience with immigrants.


the southeast and the midwest experienced  economic and population changes that attracted latinos to work in construction, landscaping  and other service industry jobs as well as in meat-packing, poultry and textile plants.
new  destination cities in areas characterized by a binary racial divide like atlanta, charlotte  and even post-katrina new orleans have seen their latino populations grow significantly  since  the  mid-1990s  (zuiga  and  hernandez-leon  2006; terrazas  2011;  massey  2008;  marquardt et al.


2011).
for example, the latino population of franklin county, alabama  grew by 2,193 percent, between 1990 and 2000.


like other new destinations, franklin  county continues to be primarily white (92 percent as of the 2010 census) and the influx  of latinos is very noticeable to established residents.
5 day laborers are one of the most visible and vulnerable manifestations of the presence of   3   the story of the founding of el sol is detailed in against the tide.


portions of this article are redacted from  the book, but the entire story of the centers founding and its operations are not included in this brief article.
4   a two-way process of immigrant integration does not mean that the receiving society must fundamentally  change itself in order to accommodate the needs and wants of immigrants; rather it means that host societies  should  be  open  and  provide  equal  opportunities  for  newcomers.


for  example,  it  does  not  mean  that  the  native-born in the united states must learn spanish to accommodate latino immigrants; rather, it means  that latino immigrants must learn english and the native-born should make opportunities and resources  for learning english available to newcomers.
in a report submitted to the office of refugee resettlement  (orr)  of  the  us  department  of  health  and  human  services,  the  orr-convened  integration  working  group defined integration as a dynamic, multidirectional process in which newcomers and the receiving  communities intentionally work together, based on a shared commitment to tolerance and justice, to create  a secure, welcoming, vibrant, and cohesive society (brown et al.


2007).
see also communication from the  commission to the council 2003.


5   between 1990 and 2010, the seven states which experienced the highest rate of growth of the unauthorized  population (a combined 14-fold increase) were all in the southeast: alabama, south carolina, north carolina,  tennessee, arkansas, kentucky and georgia (warren and warren 2013).
3  facing immigration fearslatino immigrants in new destinations.


day laborers are usually young, foreign-born men  who gather at a hiring site and wait for potential employers (mostly homeowners) to pick  them up for temporary work assignments (valenzuela et al.
2006).


such informal hiring  sites frequently form outside home-improvement stores or along streets near residential  neighborhoods, generating complaints about loitering, litter, and other health and human  safety issues (valenzuela et al.
2006; valenzuela 2007).


this combination of factors has  made day laborers and hiring sites the locus of much of the conflict in new destination  communities.
the presence of latino immigrant day laborers ignites fears about immigration held by  residents in new destinations and across the country (chavez 2008).


polls in popular news  organizations consistently show that the most common fears about immigration are that  immigrants  overburden  government  and  social  services,  take  jobs  away  from  citizens,  increase crime, pose a national security threat, and have the potential to change the culture  of the united states (fox news/opinion dynamics poll 2010).
when popularized by the  media and exploited by politicians, fear has important policy impacts.


in new destinations,  the high visibility of day laborers makes these fears all the more palpable and local elected  officials are frequently urged by frightened constituents to clean up the streets.
over the past ten years, many local governments have responded by enacting ordinances  intended  to  make  everyday  life  difficult  for  immigrants,  hoping  that  they  will  self- deport.


to a significant degree, these local ordinances are symbolic measures taken by  local politicians, often with consultation or direct assistance from national restrictionist  organizations such as the federation for american immigration reform (fair),  intended  to send a message both to constituents (that something is being done) and to washington  (that  something  should  be  done)  about  immigration.
hazleton  (pennsylvania),  prince  william  county  (virginia)  and  riverside  (new  jersey)  are  examples  of  the  dozens  of  communities that have passed local immigration enforcement legislation in recent years.


in  2012  alone,  localities  in  44  states  and  puerto  rico  enacted  267  immigration-related  laws and resolutions, which is a decrease from the 306 laws and resolutions enacted the  previous year (national council of state legislatures 2012).
during this same time period, some communities have gone against the anti-immigrant  tide and instead adopted more integrative policies (varsanyi 2010, 3).


jupiter, florida, is  one such community where local government partnered with civil society organizations to  open a resource center where day laborers could wait for work (thus effectively answering  the calls to remove the day laborers from the streets) and also access educational and social  services that facilitate the two-way process of immigrant integration.
the opening of jupiters el sol resource center jupiter is a wealthy community 90 miles north of miami.


like other small, new destination  communities  throughout  the  southeast,  jupiter  experienced  significant  economic  and  population growth in the late 1900s and the 2000s that was correlated with an influx of  immigrants from central america and mexico.
the 1990 census put jupiters population  at 24,986, of which less than 3 percent was hispanic.


by the 2000 census the population had  grown to 39,328, with a hispanic population of 7 percent.
the 2010 census put jupiters  population at just over 55,000 residents, almost 13 percent of whom were hispanic.


this   4  journal on migration and human securityrapid growth was fueled by the development of a number of planned communities, creating  an  increased  demand  for  construction  workers,  landscapers  and  other  service  industry  labor.
soon after immigrants arrived in jupiter, an open-air labor market formed in front  of apartment complexes in an immigrant neighborhood.


by 2001, town authorities and the  local police began fielding complaints from neighbors about noise, traffic, litter, and other  health, human safety, and quality of life concerns related to day labor.
from  2001  until  2006,  the  issues  of  immigration  and  day  labor  became  intertwined  in  jupiter.


the  first  step  toward  opening  a  day  labor  center  was  taken  by  immigrants  themselves.
immigrant  leaders  initially  mobilized  around  cultural  issues,  collaborating  with  the  university  to  celebrate  the  fiesta  de  candelaria,  the  most  important  festival  from the primary migrant-sending region of huehuetenango, guatemala.


the process of  organizing the fiesta in 2001 initiated the revitalization of a migrant hometown association  that would eventually become the non-profit organization corn-maya, inc.
corn-maya, in  turn, opened a pilot day labor initiative in a small storefront, housing many of the programs  and services that would eventually become central to el sol.


in the creation of a center, the immigrant community did not mobilize in isolation.
it sought  and found connections with non-immigrant jupiter residents and community groups.


a  coalition  of  immigrants,  community  residents,  the  local  catholic  church,  and  students  and professors from florida atlantic university formed and lobbied for the creation of  a  center  to  address  the  local  quality  of  life  issues  raised  by  the  open-air  labor  market.
these educational and religious institutions became crucial bridges for the community,  providing resources and garnering support from students, residents, and parishioners.


the  university contributed faculty with technical and language skills who served as liaisons  with  the  immigrant  community.
the  st.


peter  catholic  church  began  offering  spanish  language  masses  and  brought  in  a  spanish-speaking  priest  and  nuns  who  played  key  roles  in  building  trust  in  the  community.
representatives  of  jupiters  democratic  club  served as key organizers, forming a coalition, friends of el sol, that conducted research,  strategized, and informed local government representatives about the labor center model.


as father don finney, the priest who formed part of the coalition explained, it is almost  like a case study in strategic alliances.
if the church tried to do this alone, it wouldnt work.


if corn maya tried to do this alone, it wouldnt work.
if the town tried to do it alone, it  wouldnt work.


it had to have all the players there, each bringing their piece of the puzzle.
opponents  also  mobilized  in  jupiter.


in  2004  representatives  of  fair  met  with  center  opponents and provided them with talking points for letters and statements to the town  council advocating a restrictionist local approach.
ultimately, however, the town council  voted  in  favor  of  a  center  in  2005.


when  catholic  charities  stepped  up  and  pledged  financial support for the first year of the center, the stage was set for an alternative policy.
in contrast, in july 2006, as jupiter was preparing to open el sol, many communities were  continuing on the restrictive route.


hazleton, pa enacted the illegal immigration reform  act ordinance.
following hazletons lead, riverside, nj passed a similar ordinance aimed  at unauthorized workers.


one year later, in july 2007, prince william county, va adopted  similar measures.
in all three cases, the results compare unfavorably with even the short- term outcomes in jupiter.


5  facing immigration fearsan expensive response to fear the hazleton illegal immigration relief act ordinance is one of several anti-immigration  pieces of legislation that have been enacted at the local level (campbell 2007; mckanders  2009) largely in response to the perceived threat of latino immigrants.
in 2006, while  preparing  to  enact  hazletons  local  policy,  then-mayor  lou  barletta  explicitly  outlined  that fear was a primary impetus behind the restrictive ordinance.


in a speech aired on cbs,  barletta said, thats why i took action.
i saw my city gripped by fear.


because of violent  acts committed by illegal aliens, my residents were afraid to shopor even driveon  certain streets.
the  hazleton  illegal  immigration  relief act  ordinance  reflects  and  reaffirms  common  fears about the unauthorized.


in order to free residents of hazleton of the debilitating  effects on their economic and social well-being imposed by the influx of illegal aliens,  the city instituted fines of one hundred dollars a day for landlords who rented property to  individuals who could not produce social security cards or other forms of identification  to corroborate their immigration status.
businesses risked losing their local commercial  licenses if they hired an unauthorized worker, and were also charged with checking the  immigration status of all subcontractors.


the ordinance also required that all government  business be conducted in english (hazleton ordinance 2006-18 illegal immigration relief  act ordinance).
soon after enacting the original versions of the immigration-related ordinance, and under  pressure from several groups questioning the constitutionality of the new laws, hazleton  began scaling back.


the scaled-back versions of the ordinance were still discriminatory,  however, and lawsuits soon followed.
the hazleton ordinance was successfully challenged  in court at the district and appellate levels and never went fully into effect.


estimates of  the amount of money that hazleton has already spent and will continue to spend defending  what is left of the ordinance in court range from $2.
8 to $5 million (martinez 2011, 4).


like the hazleton illegal immigration act ordinance, the illegal immigration relief act in  riverside, new jersey, explicitly cites the same fears about immigrants, stating that,   illegal  immigration  contributes  to  negative  impacts  on  our  streets  and  housing,  negatively impacts our neighborhoods, subjects our classrooms to overcrowding and  puts distend [sic] demands on our schools edging our schools to fiscal hardships, leads  to higher crime rates, adds demands on all aspects of public safety jeopardizing the  public safety of legal residents and diminishes our overall quality of life.
(riverside  ordinance 2006-16 illegal immigration relief act)   the  riverside  ordinance  included  fines  of  between  one  and  two  thousand  dollars  for  landlords harboring illegal aliens, revocation of licenses for businesses that were found  employing unauthorized workers, and even potential jail sentences.


riversides ordinance  went even further, stating that any business in the united states (not just in riverside) that  aided and abetted the unauthorized was to be subject to penalties.
as  in  hazleton,  riversides  ordinance  proved  costly.


riverside  faced  legal  challenges  almost immediately after passing its immigration ordinance.
within a year it rescinded the  ordinance, but by then the small town of less than ten thousand residents had already spent   6  journal on migration and human securitymore than eighty thousand dollars in legal fees.


the cost to riverside went well beyond the  legal fees.
the riverside coalition of business owners and landlords estimates that 75  percent of the immigrant population left the town and 45 percent of local businesses closed  as a consequence (martinez 2011, 16-17).


virginias prince william county enacted a similar ordinance, but had to scale it back  significantly  after  facing  threats  of  legal  action  and  opposition  from  within,  especially  from its own police chief.
eventually the county signed a memorandum of agreement to  participate in the secure communities program, which in practice is very similar to the  countys scaled-back resolution and makes it essentially redundant.


nonetheless, prince  william  county  spent  $1.
3  million  in  start-up  costs  and  continues  to  spend  $700,000  annually to maintain a police unit specializing in criminal aliens (martinez 2011, 18).


a  report  evaluating  the  outcomes  of  the  ordinance  commissioned  by  the  county  found  that the policy had seriously disrupted police-community relations in the county, at least  temporarily (guterbock et al.
2010).


the report went on to note that the ordinance had  resulted in a significant negative impact on latinos trust in county government, desire to  live in, and perception of, life in the county.
among its conclusions, the report stated that  the policy created fear and a sense of being unwelcome among immigrants in general  (xvii).


a practical and affordable model jupiter, florida has gone against the anti-immigrant tide that swept over hazleton, riverside,  prince william county, and many other communities around the country.
jupiter did not  attempt to use local policy to make symbolic statements about national immigration policy.


jupiter is not a sanctuary city,6 as anti-immigration groups (such as fair) are apt to  claim.
the police in jupiter collaborate with immigration authorities when asked, and there  are no local ordinances prohibiting the jupiter police from asking anyone about his or her  immigration status.


jupiter has not had to spend millions of dollars defending itself against  lawsuits  for  implementing  unconstitutional  anti-immigrant  ordinances.
instead,  jupiter  opted to allow a coalition of immigrants, local residents, students, and town representatives  to come together to mediate community tensions by moving the informal labor market  and associated problems to an organized structure.


the el sol neighborhood resource  center costs jupiter taxpayers almost nothing and returns an estimated one million dollars  in services annually to the local community (el sol 2011 annual report).
7   el  sol  provides  a  critical  bridge  between  the  immigrant  and  native  populations  of  the  town.


within a few years, the town not only found a positive solution to the very real   6    sanctuary  cities  usually  prohibit  the  use  of  municipal  funds  and  resources  to  assist  ice.
they  also  do  not  collect  or  share  information  related  to  residents  immigration  status.


san  francisco  is  one  such  sanctuary city as per ord.
375-89, app.


10/24/89.
http://www.


sfcityattorney.org/modules/showdocument.
aspx?


documentid=485.
the term sanctuary city, however, is frequently used by anti-immigrant groups to  express their contempt at cities that are not in fact sanctuaries, but rather have community policing policies  (tramonte 2012).


7    el  sol  operates  with  an  annual  budget  of  approximately  $300,000,  all  of  which  comes  from  private  donations and grants.
the town of jupiter contributes by renting out the building where el sol operates for  a symbolic amount of $1 per year.


in 2012 el sol contributed services with an estimated value of $1,306,000  to the community.
7  facing immigration fearsneighborhood and quality of life problems that many new destinations face, but also began  to lay the groundwork for a long-term process of immigrant integration.


the primary goal  when it opened in 2006 was to get day laborers off the street.
in this respect, the center  succeeded and has grown beyond the expectations of its founders and supporters.


today, el sol is an established social service agency that enjoys widespread support among  jupiter residents, local media, and politicians (lazo de la vega and steigenga 2013).
open  seven days a week, el sols mission is framed in terms of improving the quality of life  for all of jupiters residents.


el sol pursues this mission by organizing and supervising  the day labor market in a controlled and sanitary atmosphere, educating day laborers and  contractors about their rights and responsibilities, assisting immigrants to become an active  and integrated part of the larger community, building bridges between jupiters different  ethnic, cultural, and religious groups, and providing occupational training, language and  literacy instruction, counseling, health education, and legal and other services to individuals  in need.
el sol provides both a critical set of services for immigrants and a way for local  residents who volunteer at the center to conceive of immigration in more human terms.


since el sol was founded in 2006, three other labor centers have opened in south florida  based on the el sol model.
although one of those centers recently closed (in lake worth),  el sol continues to receive requests from other localities about its practices and programs.


the center is now a fixture in the jupiter community.
alternative responses to fear the  el  sol  center  provides  an  alternative  model  for  local  policy  makers  who  seek  to  respond to the fears and concerns that an influx of latino immigrants generates in new  destinations.


one specific fear about latino immigrants is that they are not assimilating  properly and in particular not learning english quickly enough.
a group of protesters who  gathered each saturday outside el sol during its first years of operation frequently held  up signs demanding that immigrants learn english and decrying the need to press 2 for  english.


ironically, while they were demanding that el sol shut down, they ignored the  fact that every year hundreds of people learn english at el sol.
there are three english programs at el sol, and in 2010 almost three hundred students  increased one level in their english proficiency.


el sols clients are eager to learn english;  in a 2011 survey, 80 percent stated that classes should be mandatory, 84 percent noted that  participating in the english classes at el sol has made their lives in jupiter easier, and  80 percent felt that their improved english has also improved their job prospects.
these  figures reflect studies showing that todays immigrants are learning english at a rate faster  than in previous generations (jimenez 2011; fischer and hout 2006, 43).


access to medical care and other social services remains one of the most salient immigration- related issues for the american electorate and lawmakers.
one of the sticking points in the  debate over immigration reform has been whether immigrants will receive benefits under the  affordable care act.


across the united states, the majority of the unauthorized immigrant  population is uninsured and lacks sufficient access to preventive care.
in jupiter, el sol has  a health committee, which addresses many of these needs by providing early screenings,  preventive care, health referrals, and health education.


in 2012, el sol partnered with the  health department and a local hospital to open a joint volunteer clinic.
in its first year   8  journal on migration and human securityof operation the clinic served over 500 low-income, uninsured patients.


el sols health  program also referred over 700 clients to other local health service providers in 2012 and  held more than 40 workshops on topics ranging from cancer prevention to mental health,  nutrition and womens health.
while el sol is not in a position to provide health insurance  to the client population it serves, it is on the front lines of preventive health services and  thus reduces costs to local emergency rooms by preventing or avoiding unnecessary visits  and referring clients to available health services.


another popular charge against immigrants is that they drive down wages and make it  impossible for the american worker to compete.
the biggest protest in opposition to el  sol was the 2009 save the american worker rally, during which protesters argued that   el sol was undermining the ability of american citizens to get jobs.


it is hard to dispute that  in open-air day labor sites where work is often scarce, immigrants may accept extremely  low wages in order to secure a days work.
a nationwide study found that on average day  laborers earn less than fifteen thousand dollars annually, putting them below the poverty  line (valenzuela et al.


2006, 12).
the same study found that 49 percent of day laborers  had been denied payment for work they had already completed and 48 percent had been  underpaid.


while  el  sol  does  not  directly  negotiate  wages  with  employers,  the  simple  fact  that  employers have to register at the center encourages higher wages and deters wage theft.
workers  at  el  sol  also  have  access  to  legal  assistance  in  cases  of  wage  disputes  with  employers.


in 2012, el sols legal program assisted individuals in 372 cases, 45 of which  were related to work and wages (though none of the wage disputes arose from workers who  were matched with employers via el sol).
furthermore, the fact that the hiring process is  ordered and managed by el sol discourages the race to the lowest possible wage among  workers common to open-air hiring sites.


although the center does not formally set wages,  the workers council and volunteers suggest fair wage rates for employers and employees  based on the number of hours to be worked and prevailing local wages for landscaping,  moving,  painting,  and  other  temporary  employment  opportunities  that  characterize  the  majority  of  job  requests  at  el  sol.
in  a  2011  survey  of  el  sol  clients,  91.


6  percent  of  workers who got a job through el sol reported feeling safer and better paid than if they  had gotten a job on the street.
thus, moving workers from the street to el sol has likely  increased local wage rates rather than driven down wages in the day labor market.


a related concern with immigrant labor is the fact that unauthorized immigrants are often  subject to abuse and mistreatment, which is not only a problem for them, but also lowers  standards for other workers.
in other words, employers who do not wish to uphold basic  labor standards prefer to hire immigrant workers who they believe are less willing or able  to  file  complaints.


immigrant  workers,  and  especially  day  laborers,  are  indeed  subject  to several forms of abuse above and beyond wage theft.
a study of day laborers found  rampant abuse: 44 percent of day laborers had been denied food, water, and breaks by  their employers; 32 percent had worked more hours than agreed to with the employer; 28  percent had been threatened or insulted by the employer; 27 percent had been abandoned at   the work site by an employer; and 18 percent had been subject to violence by their employer  (valenzuela  et  al.


2006,  14).
the  anonymity  that  the  informal  labor  market  provides  employers facilitates these abuses.


such anonymity is eliminated by el sol.
employers   9  facing immigration fearsmust register, and they are therefore more likely to uphold basic labor standards.


the day  labor market may continue to be relatively unregulated, but el sol provides workers with  access to resources through which they can report abuses, and in most cases this knowledge  is sufficient to curb mistreatment on the part of employers.
despite  abundant  evidence  to  the  contrary,  the american  public  continues  to  associate  immigration with crime.


8 the mere presence of unauthorized immigrants in the united  states serves for many as evidence of a general disregard for american laws, and thus the  cognitive leap from illegal immigrant to criminal becomes an easy one to make.
the  perception of high immigrant involvement in gangs, drugs, and other criminal activity is  prevalent in media portrayals of immigration (media matters 2008) and often at the root  of the fear that divides communities.


in fact, unauthorized immigrants who are afraid of  contact with the police are often the victims of crimes which they are unlikely to report (see  marquardt et al.
2011, 136-138).


day laborers are especially susceptible to crime because  they are paid in cash and are unlikely to have bank accounts.
el sols financial literacy  programs address this issue by encouraging workers to open and use bank accounts.


more  important,  el  sol  has  become  a  trusted  community  institution  where  immigrants  can feel safe talking to the police and other authorities to report crimes, thus making it  more likely that criminals will be caught and removed from the jupiter community.
in  combination with more aggressive code enforcement and community policing, the jupiter  police  department  has  had  significant  success  in  removing  criminal  elements  from  the  community.


throughout the year the police make several presentations at el sol, ranging  from  practical  issues  such  as  bike  safety  to  warnings  about  unscrupulous  notaries  or  other criminals.
according to the 2010 uniform crime report of the federal bureau of  investigation (fbi), the number of violent crimes reported in jupiter dropped by a third  since el sol opened in 2006.


furthermore, el sol is a physical manifestation of the growing  trust in the community.
the latest (2011) town of jupiter citizen survey asked residents to  rate the sense of community: 78 percent of respondents said that the sense of community  in jupiter was good or excellent, and 74 percent said that jupiter was open and accepting  towards people of diverse backgroundsscores significantly higher than state and national  averages on these measures (jupiter citizen survey 2011, 35).


the improved relationship between the police department and the immigrant community  brokered by el sol is a great benefit, but el sol does much more to make jupiter a safer  place  to  live.
as  of  march  2011  more  than  2,000  people  were  registered  at  the  center.


each  member  has  picture  identification  with  personal  information,  address,  nationality,  and other data on the card.
el sol identification cards are recognized by the local library  and other public and private organizations in the area.


information about each members  job skills, positions worked, and employer feedback is also stored in the centers database.
el sols clients are no longer living in the shadows.


immigrants who live in jupiter feel  safe providing their personal information to el sol.
the logical result is that it would be  more difficult for someone looking to hide in the shadows to do so in jupiter.


because  workers must register at el sol, criminal aliens would be deterred from seeking work in  jupiter.
furthermore, because  immigrants now have a more open and trusting relationship   8   a variety of studies have debunked the popular belief that criminality is more common among the foreign- born.


for examples, see sampson 2008; rumbaut and ewing 2007.
10  journal on migration and human securitywith local authorities, the immigrant community itself is more likely to report the presence  of such individuals in its midst.


while jupiter is not a sanctuary city and does not issue its own identification cards, the town  is not alone in pursuing positive, practical responses to managing the problems generated  by antiquated and inadequate national immigration policies.
more than sixty cities around  the country have issued local limited cooperation ordinances between local police and  immigration  authorities  in  non-felony  crimes  (varsanyi  2010,  3).


more  than  a  hundred  other  communities  around  the  country  have  opened  day  labor  hiring  sites,  such  as  the  one in jupiter, florida (fine 2006, 3).
as the tide of restrictive state and local legislation  begins to ebb, it is possible that more inclusionary alternatives will find space to grow.


although each local community struggling with day labor and other immigration-related  issues is different, many of the lessons from the jupiter experience are applicable to other  communities.
reframing immigration in essence, el sols success in jupiter is about the practical management of real problems  and the human interactions that take place on a day-to-day basis between immigrants and  the native-born to address those problems.


board members, volunteers, and staff at el sol  do not speak with one voice on immigration policy, but they do share an understanding of  the human dimensions of the issue and an appreciation for the complexities of immigration  and the immigration debate.
el sols volunteers, staff, and community supporters come  face-to-face with the daunting hurdles confronted by unauthorized immigrants in their daily  lives.


one day it is a mother who arrives at the center in tears because she has been stopped  for driving without a license while taking her children to school and fears picking them up  because she will have to pass the same officer stationed outside the school.
the next day it  is a young man asking for help translating court documents related to his immigration case.


no matter the issue, volunteers, employees, and the workers themselves are constantly  confronted  with  the  reality  of  the  impediments  that  being  unauthorized  places  on  the  process of integrating into society.
in 2012, el sol brought workers and employers together with 140 active volunteers who  served in the kitchen, employer desk, english and literacy classes.


in this sense, el sol serves  as a bridge across the social distance that otherwise separates immigrants from the native- born in jupiter.
because jupiter attracts many retirees, el sols volunteer corps reflects  a broad spectrum of human capital from the local community, including volunteers with  experience in hospitals, schools, universities, churches, and other non-profit organizations.


more than 60 percent of el sols volunteers are over the age of 60 and almost 10 percent  are local students.
on the other hand, the average el sol worker is 40 years-of-age and  has very little education: 60 percent of el sol users have only completed primary school.


nowhere else in jupiter do these vastly different groups come together so frequently to  work collaboratively on common goals.
some of the most successful stories at el sol are those of clients who have transitioned  to  become  volunteers.


ulysses  is  a  young  man  who  was  seventeen  when  he  arrived  at   el sol for the first time.
though he did not find work at first, he attended english classes   11  facing immigration fearsand forged a lasting bond with one of el sols key volunteers.


with the assistance of the  volunteer, ulysses was able to learn english, complete his high school education and has  started taking college courses.
today, ulysses teaches his own english classes at el sol.


as ulysses explains:   my life would be completely different without el sol.
i am a volunteer now at el  sol, i have made that transition.


i went from user to user and volunteer.
i love it so  much.


later i started teaching the beginning english class.
the first day i remember  i got there very early, with all my things.


i was well-prepared.
the students started  coming in.


when everyone was already there, i wrote my name on the board.
i saw  the expression on their faces: what is this guy doing there?


they were probably  expecting some blond guy with light eyes, so they were surprised when i told them i  was going to be the instructor.
little by little i earned their trust.


the class was great.
i had nine students.


i remembered when i was in the same classroom as a student, and  now i was a teacher.
el sol cannot issue florida drivers licenses or change immigration laws, but it can and does  assist immigrants as they negotiate the many barriers to integration in a new destination  such as jupiter.


the family literacy program helps mothers to negotiate the complicated  bureaucracy of the palm beach county school system.
access to public services, the library  and the banking system for new immigrants opens pathways for language and financial  literacy.


civics  training  and  code  compliance  education  not  only  help  new  immigrants  to avoid code violations but also help them to become more engaged residents of jupiter.
opportunities for service in community cleanups and property restoration through el sol  provide an increased sense of ownership and belonging in the community.


9 through el  sol, the towns new immigrants are beginning to feel that they belong in jupiter and jupiter  belongs to them.
this provides an opportunity for jupiter to evolve as a single and more  unified community, rather than a community divided by fear and mistrust.


no matter the  outcome of immigration reform proposals at the national level, jupiter will be in a better  position to positively integrate its immigrant community than localities that have chosen   a punitive route.
moreover, the enforcement-only approach of hazleton and similar communities does not  move the immigration debate in any direction.


the costly and symbolic ordinances adopted  in hazleton and elsewhere may deflect immigrants to other areas, but they are unlikely to  cause them to leave the country.
given the sacrifices immigrants have made to get to the  united states, and the fact that many unauthorized families are rooted in the united states  via children or family members who are citizens, many are here to stay.


those who stay  may carry a distinct sense of alienation and rejection.
the process of integration for these  immigrants will be slow and difficult.


if we conceive of the united states as an efficient  immigrant integration machine, the punitive local enforcement initiatives witnessed around  the country are rapidly draining the oil that lubricates the moving parts.
the country will be  left to deal with the consequences of a persistent and potentially oppositional and racially- defined underclass.


jupiters experience with el sol shows the viability of practical local  solutions that effectively address real problems, reduce fear and alienation, and have the   9   more detailed information about el sols multiple programs, including its community service projects are  available online at el sols website at http://friendsofelsol.org/?
page_id=50 .


12  journal on migration and human securitypotential to move the national immigration debate forward in a productive way.
first,  el  sol  is  a  logical  answer  to  the  many  real  tensions  that  arise  in  communities  undergoing rapid socio-demographic and economic change.


el sol has improved the quality  of life in the neighborhoods where tensions began.
today, hundreds of day laborers no  longer line center street and complaints about public nuisances, littering, overcrowding,  and code violations have all decreased.


from the perspective of town authorities, el sol  has exceeded expectations in terms of overcoming the practical quality of life issues it was  created, in part, to address.
jupiters town manager andy lukasik explains:   the issue for us was quality of life and making sure that we addressed everybodys  needs  and  still  have  the  appropriate  respect  for  people  as  human  beings.


it  was  a  difficult balance for people.
i never claimed to want to solve immigration.


it is not our  issue to solve.
father don finney also highlights the quality of life issues.


as he put it:   it cleaned up the look on center street.
they put [up] the nice lamp posts and everything  so  that  when  you  drive  through  it  looks  better.


i  think  everyone  in  jupiter  takes  a  certain pride.
.


.
.


this is a pretty place.
it is a nice place to live, and it has that nice  quality.


the schools are good.
this is a nice place.


maybe even if you werent sold on  el sol at the beginning, you will still like that it has solved the neighborhood problem  of people standing around making it look bad.
although the town has a no-solicitation ordinance on the books, the transition to el sol  has been so effective that to this day the ordinance has never been actively enforced by the  police department.


second, el sol brings immigrants and the native-born together in a way that reduces the  set of generalized fears that stymie productive discussions about immigration.
as jupiter  residents come to better understand the forces propelling immigration, the challenges faced  by immigrants, and the contributions they make to the community, many of those fears  dissipate as the human face of immigration begins to emerge.


finally, the process of reducing fears and bridging differences takes place in two directions,  as immigrants also begin to feel more welcome and they make personal connections with  volunteers, employers, and neighbors in an environment that was previously closed and  even hostile.
ulyses, the young man who transitioned from being a client to a volunteer at  el sol, explains his experience:  i feel so safe at el sol, 100 percent.


i feel welcome at el sol.
i feel welcome in jupiter  because of el sol.


beyond the work the volunteers do .
.


.
the town was also supportive.


in the building of el sol, inside, i feel like i am at home.
i know so many people there  .


.
.


[and] the volunteers are my good friends.
i say hi, we hug; it is a great family.


i am  very comfortable there.
conclusion comprehensive  immigration  reform  remains  a  moving  target.


during  the  spring  of   13  facing immigration fears2013,  the  target  began  moving  with  exceptional  speed.
the  senate  and  president  laid  out their ideas for comprehensive immigration reform that included a path to what both  called earned citizenship for unauthorized immigrants.


the proposals currently being  discussed involve several steps to earned citizenship.
at minimum, potential beneficiaries  of comprehensive immigration reform will have to show evidence that they have learned  english, determine how much in taxes they should pay on past income, and clear a number  of other administrative requirements.


while immigrants in traditional gateway cities will  have access to well-established networks of support and advocacy organizations to facilitate  these processes, immigrants in new destinations, particularly in those localities that have  passed restrictive legislation to isolate immigrants and pressure them to leave, will find the  process onerous.
immigrants in jupiter, however, already have a place where they have  been taking english classes, have established trust, can ask questions and get appropriate  help with navigating the system.


in jupiter, immigrants have a logical place where they can  begin to emerge from the shadows, but the administrative process is just the beginning.
in the presidents january 2013 speech at del sol high school in las vegas, he hinted at  the work yet to be done:   but i promise you this: the closer we get [to comprehensive immigration reform],  the more emotional this debate is going to become.


immigration has always been an  issue that enflames passions.
thats not surprising.


there are few things that are more  important to us as a society than who gets to come here and call our country home;  who gets the privilege of becoming a citizen of the united states of america.
thats a  big deal.


when we talk about that in the abstract, its easy sometimes for the discussion  to take on a feeling of us versus them.
and when that happens, a lot of folks forget  that most of us used to be them.


we forget that.
at el sol, the discussion about who is included as a member of our society is much less  abstract.


every year hundreds of native-born residents of jupiter share their lives directly  with  jupiters  immigrants.
the  exchange  between  them  challenges  the  more  abstract  rhetorical exchange outlined by the president.


in jupiter, some residents have started the  process of remembering when they used to be them, and more importantly, they have  engaged in the process of negotiating a wider definition for us.


