critical perspectives on  clandestine migration facilitation:  an overview of migrant smuggling  research  gabriella sanchez   university of texas at el paso  executive summary current  representations  of  large  movements  of  migrants  and  asylum  seekers have become part of the global consciousness.
media viewers are  bombarded  with  images  of  people  from  the  global  south  riding  atop  of  trains, holding on to dinghies, arriving at refugee camps, crawling beneath  wire fences or being rescued after being stranded in the ocean or the desert  for days.


images of gruesome scenes of death in the mediterranean or the  arizona or sahara deserts reveal the inherent risks of irregular migration,  as bodies are pulled out of the water or corpses are recovered, bagged, and  disposed of, their identities remaining forever unknown.
together, these  images communicate a powerful, unbearable feeling of despair and crisis.


around the world, many of these tragedies are attributed to the actions  of  migrant  smugglers,  who  are  almost  monolithically  depicted  as  men  from  the  global  south  organized  in  webs  of  organized  criminals  whose  transnational reach allows them to prey on migrants and asylum seekers  vulnerabilities.
smugglers  are  described  as  callous,  greedy,  and  violent.


reports on efforts to contain their influence and strength are also abundant  in official narratives of border and migration control.
the  risks  inherent  to  clandestine  journeys  and  the  violence  people  face  during  these  transits  must  not  be  denied.


many  smugglers  do  take  advantage  of  the  naivet  and  helplessness  of  migrants,  refugees,  and  asylum seekers, stripping them of their valuables and abandoning them  to  their  fate  during  their  journeys.
yet,  as  those  working  directly  with  migrants and asylum seekers in transit can attest, the relationships that  emerge between smugglers and those who rely on their services are much  more complex, and quite often, significantly less heinous than what media  and law enforcement suggest.


the  visibility  of  contemporary,  large  migration  movements  has  driven  much research on migrants clandestine journeys and their human rights  implications.
however,  the  social  contexts  that  shape  said  journeys  and  their  facilitation  have  not  been  much  explored  by  researchers  (achilli    2017 by the center for migration studies of new york.


all rights reserved.
jmhs volume 5 number 1 (2017): 9-272015).


in other words, the efforts carried out by migrants, asylum seekers,  and their families and friends to access safe passage have hardly been the  target of scholarly analysis, and are often obscured by the more graphic  narratives of victimization and crime.
in short, knowledge on the ways  migrants,  asylum  seekers,  and  their  communities  conceive,  define,  and  mobilize mechanisms for irregular or clandestine migration is limited at  best.


the dichotomist script of smugglers as predators and migrants and asylum  seekers as victims that dominates narratives of clandestine migration has  often obscured the perspectives of those who rely on smugglers for their  mobility.
this has not only silenced migrants and asylum seekers efforts  to reach safety, but also the collective knowledge their communities use to  secure their mobility amid increased border militarization and migration  controls.


this  paper  provides  an  overview  of  contemporary,  empirical  scholarship  on  clandestine  migration  facilitation.
it  then  argues  that  the  processes  leading to clandestine or irregular migration are not merely the domain of  criminal groups.


rather, they also involve a series of complex mechanisms  of protection crafted within migrant and refugee communities as attempts  to reduce the vulnerabilities known to be inherent to clandestine journeys.
both criminal and less nefarious efforts are shaped by and in response to  enforcement  measures  worldwide  on  the  part  of  nation-states  to  control  migration flows.


devised within migrant and refugee communities, and mobilized formally  and informally among their members, strategies to facilitate clandestine  or  irregular  migration  constitute  a  system  of  human  security  rooted  in  generations-long,  historical  notions  of  solidarity,  tradition,  reciprocity,  and  affect  (khosravi  2010).
yet  amid  concerns  over  national  and  border  security,  and  the  reemergence  of  nationalism,  said  strategies  have  become increasingly stigmatized, traveling clandestinely being perceived  as an inherently  and uniquely  criminal activity.


this contribution  constitutes  an  attempt  to  critically  rethink  the  framework  present  in  everyday  narratives  of  irregular  migration  facilitation.
it  is  a  call  to incorporate into current protection dialogs the perceptions of those who  rely  on  criminalized  migration  mechanisms  to  fulfill  mobility  goals,  and  in so doing, articulate and inform solutions towards promoting safe and  dignifying journeys for all migrants and asylum seekers in transit.


the facilitation of clandestine migration while representations of recent migration flows into europe and the united states have  been characterized as unprecedented and crisis-like, historical evidence suggests migratory  flows have been significant in other times in western history.
for example, donato and  sisk (2015) demonstrated contemporary migration levels in the united states are in fact   10  journal on migration and human securityconsiderably smaller than those taking place during the 1980s following  the passage of  the immigration reform and control act of 1986.


the historical record also shows that  clandestine or irregular migrations, far from being under the control of organized crime,  have been carried out through far less nefarious mechanisms.
instead, they often reflect  long-standing social relations and migration traditions (lopez-castro 1998; spener 2009;  kandell  and  massey  2002;  ayelew  2016).


moreover,  the  social  relationships  that  are  maintained and developed as a result of transnational migration facilitate ensuing transits,  with people relying on friends and family members for the purpose of moving to other  locations.
these methods are significantly less violent or dark than what media and official  accounts suggest.


data attest that most people who eventually become undocumented or irregular migrants  did in fact enter destination countries legally, relying on a vast system of licit and illicit  practices.
for example, the majority of newly undocumented immigrants in the united  states in recent years have entered legally through air and land ports of entry (pew 2013;  warren and kerwin 2015).


legally issued documents to cross borders or enter a destination  country are frequently borrowed, purchased, or rented among travel documents from friends,  family members, and third parties (kyle and dale 2001; abel 2012).
others may claim to  be a national of a specific country, having learned to perform foreign identities that may  allow them to pass for nationals or residents of a specific nation in order to be admitted  into it or to avoid detection and removal (stone-cadena 2016; brigden 2016).


marriage is  also used with the purpose of being allowed admission or official authorization to reside in  a country (tsay 2004).
there is also a strong industry comprised by entrepreneurs who illicitly, but also legally   and often taking advantage of gaps in laws and regulations  provide services that may  be  conducive  of,  or  facilitate,  irregular  or  clandestine  migration.


businesses  like  travel  agencies, employment brokers, print shops, passport or visa forgers, language schools, or  even individuals training those seeking to travel abroad in social or cultural etiquette are  broadly defined as brokerage.
the term, in conjunction with the recognition of migrants and  asylum seekers as owning and mobilizing their agency, seeks to encompass how migration- related information and processes are controlled, evaluated, and processed (alpes 2012,  90) by migrants, asylum seekers, and their families and friends in order to advance and  complete their migratory journeys.


combined,  all  of  these  efforts  may  lead  to  the  migration  of  many  seeking  to  reach  a  destination.
many  other  persons,  however,  unable  to  secure  visas,  passports,  or  the  mechanisms required to travel, may opt for another kind of service, perhaps the most visible  and popularized form of irregular migration: the services provided by migrant smugglers.


defining migrant smuggling human smuggling is defined as the procurement, in order to obtain, directly or indirectly,  a  financial  or  other  material  benefit,  of  the  illegal  entry  of  a  person  into  a  state  party  of which the person is not a national or permanent resident (united nations 2000).
it  is most often depicted as a violent, exploitative, and criminal act controlled by groups  of men from the global south.


conceived as organized into vast, complex networks of   11  critical perspectives on clandestine migration facilitationtransnational  reach,  and  as  operating  in  partnership  with  other  criminal  organizations  like drug smugglers (davila 2015), human traffickers (shelly 2014), and even terrorists  (bensman 2016), migrant smugglers are described as posing an incredible threat to the  security of the nation-state.
they are described in media, policy, and academic circles as  greedy, as driven by the purportedly immense profits derived from the human trade, and  as banking on the desperation of nave, desperate migrants and asylum seekers worldwide.


there  is  in  fact  an  abundance  of  graphic  and  tragic  representations  of  the  experiences  of  migrants  and  asylum  seekers  in  transit  at  the  hands  of  smugglers  which  provides  a  particularly alarming portrayal of the dangers present in clandestine migration.
while it is  important to acknowledge the precariousness of smuggling transits, it is also fundamental to  establish that globally, empirical research on smuggling and its organization is scant.


most  data pertaining to smuggling activity comes from law enforcement or other official sources  (zhang 2007), which in turn rely on the most dramatic of failed clandestine journeys to  further justify enforcement practices.
in this context, it is not surprising that depictions of  smuggling will most often reflect the experiences of migrants and asylum seekers who were  the target of threats, scams, and violence before being rescued by authorities or ngos.


the reliance on these representations despite and alongside the absence of empirically- collected data raise critical methodological and conceptual concerns.
who are the migrant  smugglers?


how are they organized?
how do they perceive the work they perform, and  how is it in turn seen by those who rely on their services?


what are the motivations leading  smugglers to engage in this activity?
what do they think about the violence?


and most  importantly, are there ways to make smuggling-involved journeys safer for those who rely  on them?
during the last decade, there has been an increase in the number of empirical engagements  on smuggling facilitation.


researchers have posed critiques of the dominant characterization  of smuggling as a violent and predatory, urging a closer look at its community dimensions.
this body of scholarship argues that the facilitation of irregular migration involves a multiple  and  diverse  range  of  interactions,  many  of  which  are  far  less  tragic  or  sensationalistic  than what politicized, mediated narratives suggest (sanchez 2015; majidi 2016).


this still  narrow body of scholarship has however articulated important critiques on the need to re- evaluate smuggling dynamics in order to more critically engage on its reliance by migrant  and refugee communities, and on its role at facilitating mobility amid increasing border  enforcement and controls.
smugglers and their views hired  around  the  world  by  those  seeking  to  migrate  and  who  are  unable  to  secure  the  protection  of  visas,  permits,  or  passports,  smuggling  facilitators  have  been  throughout  history key facilitators of migration flows (gamio 1931; andreas 2013; khosravi 2010;  chu 2010; chao-romero 2010).


despite being often described as cunning, deceiving, and  greedy, smugglers and their services maintain a systematic demand among those seeking to  migrate in light of stepped-up migration and border enforcement measures.
spener (2009) and zhang (2008) have argued that the continued reliance on smuggling by  migrants and asylum seekers constitutes an indication of the practices success amid and   12  journal on migration and human securityin spite of the frequent reports of smuggling-related tragedies and of stories pertaining to  the abuses faced by migrants and asylum seekers in transit.


in fact, reliance on smuggling  service can also be interpreted as evidence of how immigration enforcement and control  along  borders  has  given  place  to  the  continued  reliance  on  alternative,  underground  if  criminalized activities to overcome mobility restrictions, and to the professionalization of  smuggling activities (andreas 2009).
while the empirical gap on migrant smuggling is significant, a few generalizations on their  activities and perceptions can be made on the grounds of studies involving direct contact  with smugglers and their clients.


the following sections describe some of the findings of  this body of work.
smugglers and their backgrounds.


while the ethnographic evidence suggests smugglers  do not present a unique or specific demographic profile, some general observations can be  made.
most smugglers are migrants or asylum seekers themselves who provide services  on behalf of friends, acquaintances, and family members relying on their past migration  experiences (stone-cadena 2016; maher 2016).


many tend to share the nationality or place  of origin of their clientele (zhang 2008).
in terms of their immigration status, they are likely  to be or have been irregular migrants at some point in their lives (sanchez 2015), although  the  participation  of  authorized  residents  and  citizens  from  countries  where  smuggling  activities take place is also commonplace (achilli 2015).


men as well as women of all  ages participate in the provision of smuggling services;1 however, the majority of those  arrested for smuggling and smuggling-related offenses are men (despite women also being  key actors of smuggling facilitation) (zhang, chin, and miller 2007; sanchez 2016).
the  majority of facilitators tend to be members of highly marginalized communities  working  class, low-income laborers, residing in or traveling through areas of high migration flows.


in short, data indicate that smugglers are ordinary citizens from multiple backgrounds.
at  best, they appear to share a highly entrepreneurial drive, further identifying themselves as  self-starters and as enjoying working independently (zhang 2007; achilli 2015).


the  social  organization  of  migrant  smuggling.
migrant-smuggling  groups  tend  to  be  constituted primarily by groups of friends and family members.


entry into the smuggling  market mostly occurs in two ways: through interactions with friends and family members  already involved in smuggling activity (zhang 2008; chin 1999), or when approached to  participate in the smuggling process in the context of their own migratory journey (achilli  2015), most often in exchange for a reduction of their smuggling fees (sanchez 2015).
tasks  are gendered.


women most often perform feminized tasks (cooking, cleaning, childcare),  as well as financial transactions (like cashing checks and ensuring fee payments have been  made or wired) (sanchez 2016; zhang, chin and miller 2007).
men are more frequently  involved in guiding and driving groups, acting as lookouts, recruiters, and guards (spener  2009).


smuggling requires no specialized or technical training or investments (zhang 2007), with  facilitators relying on the skills or resources they already possess  the ability to drive,  owning a dwelling or a vehicle, speaking the local language, or having knowledge of local  1    researchers  on  the  us-mexico  border  and  north  africa  have  also  documented  reports  of  minors  participating in the smuggling market who receive monetary compensation or who pay off their transits by  performing smuggling-related tasks (iom 2016; moreno and avedano 2015).
13  critical perspectives on clandestine migration facilitationroads (sanchez 2014).


while border enforcement and militarization has made crossings  more challenging, smugglers consistently rely on their knowledge of their territories and  on the strength of their connections, rather than on technological savviness or skill.
some  scholars have suggested that increased controls have led not just to higher smuggling prices  but also to smugglers reliance on more sophisticated technology and equipment (andreas  2009).


it is perhaps more accurate to point out that most smugglers and their clients rely  on basic cellphones and radios (mcauliffe 2016; newell et al.
2016) for communication  purposes.


the  use  of  smart  phones,  and  most  recently,  of  social  media  by  smugglers  to  recruit  and  guide  their  clients  has  also  been  documented  by  some  scholars  (petrillo  2016; mcauliffe 2016), although said usage should be interpreted as a reflection of the  affordability and availability of mobile technology, rather than as a marker of smugglers  sophistication.
data  indicate  that  smuggling  facilitators  work  independently,  relying  on  their  personal  resources and social contacts.


they perform a single, highly specific task only (guiding a  group through the desert, cooking, recruiting, driving) (zhang 2007; campana 2016) which  is performed in coordination with other facilitators.
facilitators are not always known to  each other  they may live in different cities, states and even countries.


this is also an  effective protection mechanism organic to smuggling operations: in the event one facilitator  is arrested, he or she cannot identify others involved (zhang 2008).
simultaneously, it is  important to reiterate that significant portions of the communications among smuggling  facilitators take place through mobile technology (including cell phone-based applications)  and social media, further eliminating the need for face-to-face interactions.


the tasks, when  performed effectively and in coordination, will lead clients to their final destination.
it  is  common  to  find  smuggling  facilitators  who  perform  coordinating  roles.


they  put  facilitators, clients, and community members in contact; help monitor specific journeys;  and settle the frequent financial disputes among smugglers and their customers, and among  smugglers  themselves.
coordination,  however,  should  not  be  interpreted  as  a  synonym  for leadership.


occasionally individual smugglers may assume temporary oversight for  a particular journey or a specific group of clients, yet each facilitator is still individually  responsible  of  a  specific  task  during  the  journey.
temporary  oversight  typically  comes  to an end once clients have successfully completed a specific stage of their journeys or  reached their destination.


while law enforcement and media often articulate smuggling  as  organized  in  complex  and  hierarchical  networks  (aronowitz,  2012),  ethnographers  have identified that the ability to improvise and make decisions independently (brigden  2016) are essential characteristics of successful smuggling journeys.
in other words, most  smuggling groups are organized horizontally, and lack centralized, permanent leadership  and hierarchical mechanisms (spener 2009, 147; zhang and chin 2002; sanchez 2015)  as they depend on the ability, availability, and skill of individual facilitators.


the absence  of central leadership does not suggest charismatic facilitators with leadership attributes  or inclinations do not exist, but rather than the execution and effectiveness of smuggling  activities  are  more  dependent  on  the  collaborations  among  individuals  rather  than  on  leadership.
clients perception of smuggling.


despite the infamous reputation smuggling facilitators  have in the media, being a smuggler is far from a frowned upon activity within migrant   14  journal on migration and human securityand refugee communities (majidi 2016; koser 2008).
access to or information on reliable,  trusted facilitators becomes critical in anticipation of clandestine journeys, as friends and  families of migrants and asylum seekers and the travelers themselves are vastly aware of  the challenges inherent to their passages and seek to reduce them (alpes 2012).


those  seeking to travel often conduct extensive research on their potential smuggling options  well in advance of their journeys.


