in harms way: family separation, 
immigration enforcement 
programs and security on the us-
mexico border

jeremy slack
university of texas, el paso

daniel e. martnez
george washington university

scott whiteford
university of arizona

emily peiffer
university of arizona

executive summary 
the  consequence  delivery  system  (cds)  is  a  suite  of  border  and 
immigration  enforcement  programs  designed  to  increase  the  penalties 
associated with unauthorized migration in order to convince people not to 
return (rosenblum 2013). despite its inauguration in 2011, many aspects 
of the cds are not new. cds does however, mark a shift from the deterrent 
strategy that, in the 1990s that relied heavily on the dangers of the natural 
terrain  to  dissuade  unauthorized  border  crossers,  to  one  that  actively 
punishes, incarcerates, and criminalizes them. this article presents findings 
from the migrant border crossing study, a random sample survey of 1,100 
recently deported migrants in six cities in mexico conducted between 2009 
and  2012.  it  examines  the  demographics  and  family  ties  of  deportees, 
their experiences with immigration enforcement practices and programs 
under  the  cds,  and  how  these  programs  have  reshaped  contemporary 
migration and deportation along the us-mexico border. the article covers 
programs such as criminal prosecutions of illegal entries under operation 
streamline, and the alien transfer and exit program (atep) or lateral 
repatriation program which returns immigrants to different locations from 
where they illegally entered. in relationship to these programs, it considers 
issues of due process and treatment of deportees in us custody. it also 
examines interior enforcement under secure communities, which, during 
the study period, comprised part of the overarching border security plan, 
and  screened  virtually  everybody  arrested  in  the  united  states  against 

 2015 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 3 number 2 (2015): 109-128immigration databases. 
the article concludes that these programs do not have a strong deterrent 
effect. instead, immigration enforcement has led to a caging effect over the 
past two decades which has disrupted seasonal migration flows, increased 
familial and social ties to the united states, and decreased the probability 
of returning to mexico once in the united states. the development of strong 
family and other ties to the united states contributes to a greater resolve 
to return post-deportation. 

introduction
the us customs and border protection (cbp) consolidated a new approach to immigration 
enforcement  with  the  implementation  of  the  consequence  delivery  system  (cds)  in 
2011. as described by border patrol chief michael fisher, the cds guides management 
and  agents  through  a  process  designed  to  uniquely  evaluate  each  subject  and  identify 
the ideal consequences to impede and deter future entry.1 the cds marks a profound 
shift in immigration enforcement through active prosecution of immigration violators, as 
opposed to a passive strategy of enforcement through deterrence. previous enforcement 
efforts in the 1990s relied on the natural and physical hazards of the desert to deter future 
crossings  by  driving  the  flow  of  people  into  the  harshest  terrain  along  the  us-mexico 
border  (andreas  2000;  nevins  2002).  this  approach  greatly  increased  the  lethality  of 
unauthorized migration but did little to stem the flow of people and deter future crossings 
(eschbach et al. 1999; cornelius 2001; cornelius 2005; cornelius and lewis 2007; nevins 
and aizeki 2008). the cds actively seeks to prevent and deter reentry through increased 
prosecution, incarceration, and other strategies designed to make the experience so difficult 
and costly that migrants will not return.
this article examines the demographics and family ties of recently-deported migrants and 
their experiences with immigration enforcement practices and programs under the cds, 
including issues of due process and treatment of deportees in us custody. the analysis 
focuses on two cds programs2: (1) operation streamline, which criminally prosecutes 
illegal entrants en masse in particular border patrol sectors and crossing corridors; and 
(2) the alien transfer and exit program (atep), which deports unauthorized migrants 
apprehended in one region to another part of the border (danielson 2013; de len 2013). 

1   testimony of michael j. fisher, chief, us border patrol, us customs and border protection, before 
the house committee on homeland security, subcommittee on border and maritime security, does 
administrative amnesty harm our efforts to gain and maintain operational control of the border? 
2011. available at: http://www.dhs.gov/news/2011/10/04/written-testimony-cbp-house-homeland-security-
subcommittee-border-and-maritime. 
2   the cds includes the following programs: operation streamline, alien transfer and exit program 
(atep), mexican interior repatriation program (mirp), and operation against smugglers initiative on 
safety and security (oasiss). additional initiatives that represent examples of the cds include: expedited 
removal proceedings, reinstatement of removal, voluntary return, efficient immigration court hearings, 
and warrant of arrest/ notice to appear (see fisher testimony, supra). we include a discussion of interior 
enforcement in this article because the removal of people who have established homes in the united states 
is vital to the continued functioning of this enforcement strategy. 

110

journal on migration and human securitythe analysis also examines experiences of deportees with secure communities, an interior 
enforcement program which between october 2008 and november 2014 screened virtually 
all  people  who  were  arrested  against  the  department  of  homeland  securitys  (dhss) 
automated biometric identification system (ident) database for immigration violations. 
we ask: (1) who is most affected by these programs? (2) what is the overall impact and 
efficacy of increased punishments for unauthorized migrants? the findings show that border 
enforcement practices over the past two decades have led to longer stays, and therefore, 
increased ties to the united states. the current approach to immigration enforcement has 
caused disproportionately negative impacts on people who have been removed who have 
family in the united states. 
to answer the research questions, the paper draws on the migrant border crossing study 
(mbcs), a data source based on surveys conducted by the authors with a random sample of 
deportees in six cities, including five cities along the us-mexico border and mexico city. 
the mbcs differs from previous quantitative studies that focus on peoples propensity to 
migrate in sending communities in mexico (massey, durand, and malone 2002; durand 
and massey 2004; cornelius and lewis 2007) or border flows (bustamante 2002). the 
mbcs allows scholars and policymakers to better understand who is being deported, what 
they  experience  during  their  northward  journeys,  and  what  happened  while  they  were 
processed through the programs that comprise the cds. the goal is to provide an empirical 
basis by which to bring the questions and concerns generated by two bodies of literature 
into the policy arena. first, literature based on qualitative, historical, and meta-theoretical 
interpretations  of  border  enforcement  procedures  has  focused  on  the  human  and  social 
costs of migration, especially migrant deaths in the desert (andreas 2000; nevins 2002; 
nevins and aizeki 2008; heyman 2008; martinez, cantor, and ewing 2014). the second, 
more recent body of literature has developed around deportation, especially interpreting 
the potential deportability of both authorized and unauthorized immigrants as a form of 
social control (coleman 2007, 2009; nez and heyman 2007; varsanyi 2008; de genova 
and peutz 2010; varsanyi 2010; coleman and kocher 2011). 

research methodology and sample characteristics
the  data  utilized  in  this  analysis  is  from wave  ii  of  the  mbcs.  it  is  based  on  survey 
interviews  by  us  and  mexican  researchers  with  1,110  recent  deportees  between  2009 
and  2012,3  covering  their  experiences  crossing  the  border,  being  apprehended  by  us 
authorities,  and  being  repatriated  to  mexico.4  interviews  took  place  at  ports  of  entry 
immediately following deportation and in migrant shelters in tijuana and mexicali, baja 
california; nogales, sonora; ciudad jurez, chihuahua; nuevo laredo, tamaulipas; and 
mexico city.5 wave ii covers a period characterized by heightened border enforcement and 
the maturation of several measures designed to deter unauthorized entry. while the cds 
3   wave ii of the mbcs included 27 interviews during 2009, 14 during 2010, 999 during 2011, and 73 
during 2012.
4   wave i was conducted with 421 deportees in nogales, sonora from 2007 to 2009. 
5   interviews in mexico city were with participants of the mexican interior repatriation program (mirp), 
which offers people a flight to mexico city or a bus ticket home out of the tucson sector during the 
summer months, instead of being dropped off at the border. the program did not operate in 2012, and the 
future of this program is uncertain. 

111

in harms waywas formally launched in 2011, its component initiatives were all functioning prior to that 
date. operation streamline began in 2005 and atep has been documented in some form 
or another throughout the history of the united states border patrol (usbp) (hernandez 
2010). while migration and border enforcement are constantly evolving and changing, the 
mbcs captures all official border enforcement measures in place at the time this article 
was written. an important goal of the mbcs is to provide generalizable findings about 
abuses  and  hardships  of  the  border  crossing  experience  that  will  be  useful  to  scholars, 
nongovernmental organizations, and policymakers. 
according to mexican government statistics, in 2011 there were 267,029 deportations and 
repatriations6 to the six cities represented in the survey (rodrguez and martnez 2013). 
total  deportations  and  repatriations  to  these  cities  comprised  66  percent  of  all  people 
returned by the united states to mexico that year (ibid.). the mbcs survey consisted 
of 250 questions, was carried out in a face-to-face setting, and lasted approximately 45 
minutes.7  the  researchers  only  interviewed  people  18  years  of  age  or  older  who  had 
crossed without legal documents sometime after september 11, 2001 and were deported 
within  a  month  prior  to  the  interview.  a  single  probability  weight  based  on  three 
characteristics (mexican state of repatriation, gender, and mexican region of origin) was 
constructed. an iterative proportional fitting (i.e., raking) method was used to construct the 
weights because marginal totals in the population are known but joint distributions in the 
population are not known (deming and stephan 1940). in order to compare people with 
different migratory histories, all data presented in this article refer to peoples most recent 
crossing, apprehension, and deportation experience.
table  1  provides  descriptive  statistics  for  the  survey  respondents.  the  average  person 
interviewed was a 32-year-old male with eight years of formal education who earned a 
median household income of $346 dollars per month before attempting to cross into the 
united states. 
about one-half of the survey respondents spoke at least some english, and one in 10 spoke 
an indigenous language in addition to spanish. sixty-two percent were employed before 
deciding to leave mexico, and 42 percent were the sole income provider for their families. 
three-quarters of deportees had previously lived or worked in the united states. among 
those who had lived or worked in the united states, the median time spent in the country 
was nine years. 
one-half had at least one us citizen family member, and about one in five had at least 
one child under the age of 18 with us citizenship. almost one-half of those interviewed 
expressed that they intended to settle permanently during their last crossing, and 30 percent 
stated that their current home was in the united states. 
this is a strikingly different portrait of deportees than the common conception of seasonal 
laborers and young single men with no real ties to the united states. julieta, a 24-year-old 
deportee, explained, as a mother it is very difficult to leave your children over therei 

6   repatriation refers to an administrative action used at the discretion of border officials to allow an 
individual to depart from the united states voluntarily rather than undergo formal removal proceedings.
7   we used a random spatial sampling technique to ensure external validity. researchers did not ask for 
volunteers, but rather randomly selected potential participants at shelters and ports of entry. 

112

journal on migration and human securitypercent/mean

90%
10%

table  1.  demographic  characteristics  and  ties  to  the 
united states
variable
male
female
age
formal educational attainment 
monthly household income before crossing (in us dollars)
english-speaking (at least some)
indigenous language-speaking
sole economic provider for household
employed before crossing
have lived or worked in the us
     years in the us (among people with us experience)
us citizen family members
us citizen child
us citizen minor child
current home located in the us
intended  to  emigrate  permanently  after  last  crossing  (10  years  or 
longer)

32 years
8 years 
$346
47%
8%
42%
62%
75%
9 years
49%
23%
20%
30%
 46%

source: migrant border crossing study, wave ii (n = 1,110), weighted data.

feel really bad about that. my daughter lives there with her father. he was abusive to me, 
so i am afraid to leave her there with him.
one might assume that family connections to the united states would generate legal options 
for  immigration,  but  this  is  rarely  the  case.  under  the  immigration  and  naturalization 
act, there are three broad categories for potential immigrants seeking lawful permanent 
residence.8 each of these categories is subject to direct numerical limitations each fiscal 
year  and  additional  limits  by  country.9 this  quota  system,  combined  with  the  use  of  a 
lottery for increasing the diversity of immigrants, makes legal immigration in any given 
year more likely for an individual from a country with a low historical flow of immigrants 
than for an individual from a country with a high historical flow such as mexico. 
while 49 percent of people surveyed had a us citizen family member, many do not fit into 
categories that allow for legal entry, and if they do, the queue can stretch 20 years or longer. 
for  instance,  the  us  state  departments visa  bulletin  for  january  2015  reveals  a  visa 
priority date of september 15, 1994 in cases involving a us citizen who filed an immigrant 
visa  petition  for  their  unmarried  adult  son  or  daughter  from  mexico.  family  members 

8   family sponsored immigrants, employment-based immigrants and diversity immigrants may quality for 
lawful permanent residence. ina  201, 8 u.s.c.  1151.
9   ina  201, 8 u.s.c.  1151; ina  202, 8 u.s.c.  1152.

113

in harms waycannot file for permanent residency until their visa priority date becomes current, more 
than a 20 year wait in this case. moreover, operation streamline prosecutes individuals 
who have crossed the border without authorization. prior to this program, border officials 
commonly  exercised  their  discretion  to  allow  unauthorized  migrants  to  voluntarily  be 
repatriated to mexico, instead of subjecting them to formal removal proceedings, which 
carry criminal charges. a far higher percentage of people than in the past undergo removal 
proceedings and are therefore inadmissible to the united states. 
for the average mbcs respondent, who likely possesses low levels of human and financial 
capital  (see  table  1),  legal  immigration  under  the  current  statutory  scheme  would  be 
extremely  difficult  or  impossible.  for  example,  a  32-year-old  mexican  man  with  eight 
years of formal education, some work experience in mexico and the united states, at least 
one us citizen family member other than a spouse, and a us citizen child under the age 
of 21, may never find a way to immigrate legally. while the executive action announced 
by president obama in november 2014 would extend temporary administrative relief to 
as  many  as  5.2  million  individuals  that  lack  immigration status  (warren  2014),  certain 
previous immigration-related criminal charges would exclude potential beneficiaries from 
the  deferred action  for  childhood arrivals  (daca)  program,  the  deferred action  for 
parents of americans and lawful permanent residents (dapa) program, and other future 
avenues to legal status. 

the  consequence  delivery  system  and 
enforcement

interior 

the effects on deterrence of removal programs

the cds seeks to impose additional repercussions for unauthorized entry in hopes that 
people will decide not to attempt another crossing. claims that these programs significantly 
decrease the likelihood that people will return have never been externally evaluated or proven 
using reliable data, with the exception of recidivism rates, which have their own limitations 
(rosenblum  2013).10 the  government accountability  office  (gao)  has  recommended 
that immigration and customs enforcement (ice) provide metrics for evaluating removal 
programs due in part to their high cost (gao 2012), which is illustrated by the combined 
budget of cbp and ice of $18.2 billion in the 2014 fiscal year (fy) (dhs 2013). 
the  mbcs  data  show  that  deterrence  by  arrest,  incarceration  and  removal  is  largely 
ineffective. the majority of respondents expressed that they intend11 to return to the united 
states sometime in the future (55 percent), with the rate being 18 percentage points higher 
for people who consider their current home to be located in the united states (66 percent 
vs. 48 percent) (p < 0.001). among people who stated that their home is in the united 
states, only 12 percent said they would not return in the future. antonio, a 42-year-old 
deportee, explained, i have no choice, my family is there. i need to go back to my children 

10   recidivism assumes that people will have the same probability of being apprehended again, rather than 
taking a more costly or risky route that guarantees greater likelihood of success.
11   although intentions many not necessarily translate into actual behavior, the theory of planned behavior 
suggests intentions are the most proximate determinant of behavior (ajzen 1991).

114

journal on migration and human securitywho want me back. while it is important to note that future intention to cross is different 
from actually crossing the border, the data could just as easily undercount people who will 
return as over-count. participants in the study were interviewed immediately following 
deportation, when experiences of incarceration and the dangers of crossing were fresh in 
their minds. following return to mexico, the availability of work and other social or cultural 
pressures may cause people to reconsider their intentions to cross in the future. however, 
david spener notes that migrants tend to downplay the negative aspects of migration as 
time passes (2009). it is possible that some people may decide not to migrate again, while 
others who stated they would not attempt another crossing may indeed decide to do so upon 
returning to their communities of origin. 

do you believe you will cross again in the future? 

(yes responses by variable of interest)

67%

53%**

56% 54%

66%

48% 50%

48%***

59%

51%*

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

note: p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 indicate the difference is statistically significant. 
streamline limited to people who crossed through sectors that have implemented the program.

source: migrant border crossing study, wave ii (n = 1,110).

115

in harms waydeterrence  became  the  linchpin  of  us  border  enforcement  policy  in  the  mid-1990s, 
(andreas  2000;  nevins  2002;  dunn  1996,  2009;  rubio  goldsmith  and  reineke  2010; 
ewing 2014) and yet, despite billions of dollars spent, thousands of deaths, and millions 
of people detained, only 26 percent of all respondents stated that they would never return. 
graph  1  compares  the  decision  to  cross  again  with  the  specific  removal  program  (i.e., 
operation streamline, atep, and secure communities). as shown, these programs do not 
correspond to a significantly lower rate of future crossing intentions. operation streamline 
is shown to cause a slight, but not statistically significant decrease. however, people who 
have been laterally repatriated report intentions to cross again at higher rates when compared 
to people not processed through this program (p < 0.01). settlersthose who state they 
intend to migrate permanentlyalso report that they will cross again at higher rates. these 
findings differ slightly from official statistics outlined in a report by the congressional 
research service (crs) that show a decline in recidivism for people who faced criminal 
prosecutions within a period of one fiscal year (rosenblum 2013). however, we contend 
that statements about the intention to return are a more accurate indicator because they 
account for a more flexible and realistic time period to recuperate resources rather than 
the occurrence of repeat crossings within a period of one fiscal year. furthermore, using 
recidivism statistics assumes that people will have the same likelihood of apprehension 
before and after a criminal prosecution. our qualitative data show that people are likely 
to invest more time, effort and resources in future crossings, or take a riskier approach, in 
order to avoid detection after prosecution. moreover, nothing affects the decision to cross 
again as much as stating that ones home is in the united states, a factor not considered in 
the crs report.
considering the amount of taxpayer dollars being spent, and the number of lives being 
affected,  a  serious  evaluation  of  these  programs  is  necessary  to  justify  their  continued 
operation. the following sections present survey findings on operation streamline, atep, 
and the interior immigration enforcement programs secure communities and 287(g). 

operation streamline
 we all went in a big group in front of the judgethey put chains on us really tightthe 
whole time in there they made me feel like i killed someone.  javier

operation streamline is a coordinated program of immigration enforcement and criminal 
prosecution that is characterized by en masse plea agreements for immigration offenders 
who have illegally entered the united states, a misdemeanor offense. those with previous 
convictions of criminal offenses can be charged with illegal reentry, which is an aggravated 
felony if combined with other charges. the program officially began in the del rio border 
patrol sector (tx) in 2005 and expanded to the tucson sector (az) by 2008 (lydgate 
2010). it currently operates in all but three sectors along the southern border.12 
in  operation  streamline,  a  defense  attorney  is  provided  for  defendants,  sometimes  in 
groups, and sometimes one-on-one, but the limited time allotted and complicated court 

12   the el centro and san diego sectors (ca) do not participate in operation streamline, and the big 
bend sector (tx) experiences too few apprehensions to warrant the use of the program.

116

journal on migration and human securitysetting have raised concerns about due process and access to effective legal counsel. when 
asked what did your lawyer inform you about your rights? only 30 percent mentioned 
any sort of basic legal right such as the right to silence or a fair trial. fifty-five percent of 
respondents stated that their lawyer simply informed them that they needed to sign their 
order of removal and plead guilty. six percent reported that their lawyers did not tell them 
anything. only one percent reported being informed that they could report abuses. and 
only three people stated that their lawyer screened for legal immigration options based on 
family connections, which is relevant to the subsequent removal process. under the current 
immigration system, if more people were to fight the charges, the enormity of the caseload 
would quickly overwhelm the capacity of the courts.

table 2.  interaction with legal counsel during operation 
streamline
variable
processed through operation streamline1
shackled during operation streamline

27%
95%

percent

what did your lawyer tell you about your rights?2

sign the form and do not fight the charges
some mention of basic legal rights
nothing or could not understand
could not recall
other
asked to report abuses
check for legal status of defendant
prospect of being paroled while waiting for resolution of an       
immigration case. 

 

55%
30%
6%
3%
3%
1%
1%
0%

1.) among all respondents. when people apprehended and repatriated in sectors not practicing 
operation streamline are omitted, the percentage increased to 35%.  
2.) among respondents who gave valid responses. does not sum to 100 due to rounding.   
source: migrant border crossing study, wave ii (n = 1,110), weighted data. 

 

unauthorized entry carries a maximum six-month sentence and those who are convicted 
have  a  criminal  record  based  on  an  immigration  offense,  which  hinders  future  legal 
residence or entry.13 if apprehended again, they will be charged with illegal re-entry, which 
generally carries a longer prison sentence. however, when asked what they understood 
about  their  sentence,  only  71  percent  of  respondents  processed  through  operation 
streamline mentioned that a judge had told them they would face some amount of jail time 
if they return to the united states after being deported. however, once people have plead 
to the criminal charges, even the misdemeanor plea options, it becomes almost impossible 
to pursue legal immigration avenues which may have been available in the past. operation 

13   ina  275, 8 u.s.c.  1325.

117

in harms waystreamline  also  diverts  law  enforcement  and  judicial  resources  away  from  prosecuting 
more serious offenders, including those who represent a public safety or security risk (see 
lydgate 2010). 

federal criminal convictions for illegal entry have increased substantially over the past 
decade from 3,900 in fy 2000 to 92,215 in fy 2013 (trac 2014). federal convictions 
for illegal reentry increased from 6,513 in fy 2000 to 19,463 in fy 2012, while other 
immigration  convictions  increased  from  1,032  to  1,504  during  this  same  time  period 
(light,  lopez,  and  gonzalez-barrera  2014).  in  fy  2000  only  17  percent  of  federal 
convictions were for immigration-related offenses, but by fy 2012 this share had increased 
to 30 percent (ibid.). operation streamline has driven the increase in federal convictions 
for  immigration-related  offenses.  for  instance,  45  percent  of  all  immigration-related 
prosecutions in southwest border districts between fy 2005when operation streamline 
first beganto fy 2012 were a result of operation streamline proceedings (rosenblum 
2013). 

the changes in prosecution brought about by operation streamline also likely account for 
a sizeable proportion of criminal aliens who have been removed for immigration crimes. 
among all criminal aliens removed in fy 2013, 31 percent were removed for immigration 
infractions (which includes unlawful entry and reentry), while the other largest categories 
were traffic violations (15 percent) and drug offenses (15 percent) (simanski 2014). 
as discussed, operation streamline has been criticized on the ground that mass trials are 
anathema to the justice system due to the lack of due process and inability to effectively 
communicate the consequences of the conviction and future apprehensions. in addition, 
defendants  are  generally  shackled  before,  during  and  after  their  court  appearances. 
defendants reported being shackled at the feet, waist and wrists for a median of six hours 
while they are transferred to and from the federal courthouse. many women complained 
about not being able to go to the bathroom during this period because the shackles hold 
their pants up. 
because of operation streamline, the number of people who have been sent to federal 
prison for immigration violations has also increased tremendously. thirty-eight percent 
of all survey respondents were criminally detained for more than one week, which means 
that they were not simply processed by border officials, but were also sent to immigration 
detention or to federal prison where they served a sentence for illegal re-entry.14 for people 
who decide not to sign the removal order and who fight their cases, immigration detention 
can last for excessive periods, even years, due to a backlog in the system (mountz 2010). 
there  is  an  enormous  cost  associated  with  increased  incarceration,  with  each  detainee 
costing an estimated $119 dollars per day (dhs 2013). the federal detention budget for 
ice was $1.96 billion in fy 2013, excluding the cost of incarcerating people convicted 
of  crimes  who  are  sent  to  the  federal  prison  system  (ibid.).  the  legal  implications  of 
operation  streamline  will  be  experienced  for  decades  in  part  because  criminal  records 
impede eligibility for immigration status, employment, and full participation in us society. 

14   those who are convicted of a federal offense are sent to a federal prison alongside the general 
population. people attempting to fight an immigration case are held in immigration detention. 

118

journal on migration and human securitythe  alien  transfer  and  exit  program  (atep):  lateral 
repatriation 
atep15  is  an  enforcement  program  with  the  explicit  directive  of  breaking  smuggling 
networks (gao 2010). under this program, the border patrol deports migrants from a 
different sector along the border from the one in which they were apprehended (de len 
2013). the mbcs found that 13 percent of deportees were laterally repatriated16 and 20 
percent were deported between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. despite the stated goal 
of atep to break up smuggling networks, people processed through the program reported 
that they will return to the united states at higher rates. forty percent of people processed 
through atep reported that they planned on crossing again within the next week compared 
to just 28 percent of people not processed through the program. the mbcs findings also 
show that atep sends people away from the arizona-sonora border, which is the second 
busiest point of unauthorized crossing, to other areas where fewer people cross. officially, 
only men are processed through atep. however, women who are separated from men 
during the deportation process are also deported alone. as a result, 17 percent of the people 
deported to sonora, mexico are women versus 10 percent border-wide due to men being 
sent to other parts of the border (rodrguez and martnez 2013). the separation of women 
from male family or friends with whom they are traveling places them at increased risk of 
theft, violence and abuse (danielson 2013, 11).
mexicos northeastern border region is home to the criminal organization, los zetas. while 
by no means an exception among criminal organizations, los zetas has been known to 
kidnap, extort, and kill migrants on a large scale. the infamous massacre of 72 migrants in 
august 2010 and the discovery of mass graves containing hundreds of migrants have raised 
concerns about the ethics of continuing deportations to this area. in recent years tamaulipas 
has become the top state for deportations with tens of thousands more deportations than the 
number of people apprehended in the corresponding area (meyer and isacson 2013; slack 
2015). many people are also sent to cities in this region in the middle of the night. twenty 
percent of all survey respondents were deported to the border between the hours of 10:00 
p.m. and 5:00 a.m. when evaluating the cds as an immigration enforcement strategy, we 
must ask if it is justifiable to put peoples lives in danger to punish them for unauthorized 
entry.

interior enforcement: secure communities and 287(g)
twenty-five percent of mbcs respondents were apprehended as a consequence of interior 

15   the survey defined atep recipients as individuals who were apprehended by the border patrol while 
crossing and returned to mexico in a different, non-adjacent border patrol sector. it excluded individuals 
who went to long-term detention and/or successfully arrived at their desired destination. it also excluded 
people that were deported to adjacent sectors to eliminate people that might have walked into another sector 
before being apprehended (n = 505).
16   this is a conservative estimate that does not include people who arrived at their desired destination or 
were detained for more than one week. to be counted, individuals must have crossed and been deported in 
different and non-adjacent sectors. 

119

in harms wayenforcement programs such as the secure communities program17 (s-comm) or 287(g).18 
interior enforcement targets people that are already settled in the united states and have 
established a life there, making it a particularly traumatic experience. studies have shown 
that  these  programs  lead  to  a  racialized  form  of  policing,  generating  extreme  distrust 
between minority communities and the police (coleman and kocher 2011). research has 
also illustrated that the s-comm rollout had no impact on alleviating index crime rates at 
the local level (miles and cox, forthcoming). the roll-out of s-comm marked the end of 
the highly visible spectacle of workplace raids, such as the 2008 postville raid in iowa, 
which  provoked  an  outcry  from  human  rights  organizations,  businesses  and  religious 
groups. s-comm was far less visible, and causes a less concentrated economic impact as 
compared to workplace raids, which have the potential to shut down whole businesses and 
even sectors of the economy. 

table  3.  comparison  between  people  apprehended 
through interior enforcement programs such as secure 
communities or 287(g) and those apprehended through 
other means
variable

difference

other removal 
program (75%)

interior 

enforcement (25%)

us citizen family members
us citizen children
current home in us
total years in us

43%
28%
47%

51%
22%
25%

8.2 years

6.0 years

8%
6%

22%***

2.2 years***

note: p < 0.10, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 indicate the difference is statistically significant.

source: migrant border crossing study, wave ii (n = 1,110), weighted data.

almost half of the people deported through interior enforcement measures stated that their 
home is in the united states versus only a quarter of other deportees (see table 3). they 
had also spent an average of 8.2 years in the united states versus 6.0 for other deportees, 
further illustrating that interior enforcement programs target people who have established 
17   dhs announced the discontinuation of the secure communities program on november 20, 2014. the 
program will be replaced by the priority enforcement program (pep), through which ice will continue 
to rely on fingerprint-based biometric data submitted during bookings by state and local law enforcement 
agencies, but should only seek the transfer of an alien in the custody of state or local law enforcement 
when the alien poses a demonstrable risk to national security or has been convicted of specific crimes. 
see memorandum from dhs secretary jeh johnson regarding secure communities, 20 november 2014, 
available at: http://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/14_1120_memo_secure_communities.pdf. 
18   for the mbcs sample, people included in this category must have been apprehended by police outside 
of the border zone and subsequently deported. it is often difficult to determine whether people apprehended 
inside the border zone were processed through an interior enforcement program or one of the many 
informal arrangements between police and the border patrol. for instance, in southern arizona the police 
frequently call border patrol agents when they suspect someone might be unauthorized rather than going 
through formal channels, charging them with a crime or processing them. however, according to ice 
statistics, 20 percent of all removals in 2011 stemmed from secure communities (gao 2012). 

120

journal on migration and human securityties  and  roots  in  the  united  states,  including  children.  this  creates  consequences  for 
children who not only witness their families physically torn apart, but who must live with 
the absence of a parent. 
besides having a devastating impact on families, interior immigration enforcement efforts 
invariably turn law enforcement officers into immigration officials in the minds of immigrants 
in many communities. this hinders the ability of a police force to investigate crimes, which 
generally  requires  the  trust  and  cooperation  of  receptive  communities.  people  fear  any 
interaction with law enforcement, be it a simple traffic stop or the reporting of serious 
crimes, because they could end up being deported. due to this fear, they avoid authorities 
at all costs. one man described how a chance car accident resulted in his deportation and 
the abandonment of his young daughter:

i was leaving the park with my kids when a man crashed into me. the cops came and 
saw that i didnt have a drivers license so they fingerprinted me. he said i was going 
to be deported. i asked if i could call someone to take my children. he said i could, 
but when my brother in-law [only documented family member besides children] did 
not show up, the police officer said he could not wait any longer so i asked the woman 
that was helping translate for me to watch them. i had no option other than to trust 
her.  santiago 

treatment of deportees in us custody

due process abuse 

many nongovernmental organizations and immigrant rights groups have expressed concern 
that usbps removal procedures, including operation streamline, do not meet basic due 
process requirements (nmd 2011). the mbcs sought to uncover how people understood 
their experiences in us custody. nearly all respondents (96 percent) indicated they signed 
a removal order while in us custody, whether a voluntary return or a formal removal.19 
among those who signed, 28 percent reported that no one explained the documents they 
had signed, and 27 percent responded no or dont know when asked if they knew 
what they had signed. thirty-three percent reported feeling forced or pressured to sign a 
removal order. this occurred largely while in the custody of the usbp.
there  is  little  transparency  about  what  happens  to  migrants  in  the  us  justice  system. 
signing documents while in us custody can have long-term and far-reaching consequences 
for peoples future ability to immigrate legally. 20 individuals facing deportation have a 
right to due process including notice and a hearing.21 dense, complex forms which fail to 

19   the remaining four percent most likely refused to sign. they were still removed, but required (often 
forcibly) to put a thumbprint in a box marked refused to sign.
20   for example, an immigration offense such as entering without inspection may be an aggravated 
felony with harsh immigration consequences if an individual was previously deported for another offense. 
ina  101(a)(43)(o), 8 u.s.c.  1101(a)(43)(o). individuals who were previously removed from the 
united states are ineligible to receive visas and ineligible to be admitted to the united states for certain 
periods of time. ina  212(a)(9)(a), 8 u.s.c.  1182(a)(9)(a). 
21   see, e.g., landon v. plasencia, 259 u.s. 21, 32-33 (1982).

121

in harms wayprovide adequate, clear information on remedies and consequences of action or inaction 
may violate constitutionally guaranteed due process rights.22 
the increased use of expedited removal, a summary deportation without the benefit of a 
trial before an immigration judge, has also raised concerns about peoples knowledge of 
and access to legal counsel. the logic behind not incorporating removal proceedings into 
the criminal justice system has a long and complicated history, but largely hinges on the 
ruling that deportation is not considered a criminal punishment (kanstroom 2007). it is 
important to reevaluate the role of border officials in processing, sentencing and removing 
unauthorized migrants. border officials cannot reasonably be expected to perform the tasks 
of arresting officer, judge, prosecutor and defense attorney all at once. moreover, incentives 
for the border patrol and ice are focused on increasing deportations. in order to ensure 
that reasonable protections exist, the processing, sentencing and removal of unauthorized 
migrants must be excised from border officials and ice and returned to the court system. 

conclusion: what is security?
increased border enforcement has dominated recent discussions about immigration reform. 
the idea that reform can only happen once the border is secure, raises the question of what 
security might mean for different groups. is a secure border one through which nothing 
and no one that is unauthorized can pass, or is it one where quality of life and a clear, just 
and transparent process of border enforcement is ensured for people that live in its shadow 
(heyman 2013)? an impermeable border is impossible if the united states and mexico 
expect  to  maintain  or  expand  trade  and  economic  development.  there  are  other  ways 
to stem the flow of migrants, such as promoting economic development in mexico and 
central america which would provide people with the option not to migrate, commonly 
referred to as, el derecho de no migrar. rather than assert that more border enforcement 
is necessary in order to proceed with immigration reform, we would like to revisit what 
border enforcement aims to accomplish. 
while the official mission of cbp is to prevent terrorism,23 this is hardly its day-to-day task. 
the replacement of the immigration and naturalization services (ins) by the department 
of homeland security as the umbrella organization for the border patrol emphasizes its 
security-oriented function. the rise of the cds illustrates the extent to which enforcement 
has become more punitive. the mbcs sheds light on what is happening under the guise 
of security along the border. does operation streamline or atep increase security? does 
family separation and detention increase security? to conflate all immigration enforcement 
with security distorts the nature of these programs. any discussion of reforms needs to 
address the explicit and implicit goals of specific enforcement programs, as well as their 
unintended consequences. 
as shown by the mbcs, more and more of the people who are being expelled from the 
united states have very strong ties to the country as the family members of us citizens. a 
deportation should not be seen as an event affecting only the deportee, but as one affecting 

22   walters v. reno, 145 f.3d 1032 (9th cir. 1998).
23   the mission of cbp is to protect the american public against terrorists and the implements of terror. 
there is no mention of unauthorized migrants. http://www.cbp.gov/xp/cgov/about/mission/guardians.xml.

122

journal on migration and human securitytheir family members and community as well. family reunification is one of the primary 
goals of the us immigration system.24 immigration reform must first and foremost provide 
pathways to citizenship for the family members of us citizens already living and working 
in  the  united  states.  lawmakers  should  also  reevaluate  people  with  minor  infractions, 
such as immigration-related offenses and traffic violations that result in deportations, who 
would otherwise be eligible for relief under daca, dapa, or the proposed development, 
relief, and education for alien minors (dream) act. moreover, it is important to reduce 
or eliminate penalties for false claims of citizenship, which currently lead to a permanent 
bar from legal entry. in our research, we found that the vast majority of the people who 
attempt to cross the border by talking their way through ports of entry claiming to be us 
citizens are young people who have spent significant time living in the united states and 
are unaware of the repercussions of doing so.25 these individuals often have little or no 
connection to mexico and find themselves in an extremely difficult and precarious position 
upon deportation to mexico. for instance, an 18-year-old deportee, julian, stated, i have 
been in the united states since i was five. i got in a fight right after i turned 18 and the judge 
deported me. i dont know anyone in mexico. i dont exist here or in the united states. 
some scholars have recently claimed that mass labor migration from mexico to the united 
states  has  ended  due  to  the  economic  downturn,  the  impact  of  anti-immigrant policies 
in the united states, and economic improvements, declining fertility rates, and an aging 
population in mexico (durand 2013; massey and gentsch 2014). while the united states 
may not experience the same levels of migration from mexico as it did in the early-to-
mid 2000s, we are not entirely convinced that this is a permanent decline in unauthorized 
mexican migration given the tenuous and often volatile nature of macroeconomic processes. 
further,  the  mbcs  findings  highlight  that  a  shift  toward  family-oriented  migration  is 
becoming a more significant portion of the unauthorized stream. 
the  mbcs  findings  suggest  that  the  united  states  may  be  experiencing  a  new  era  of 
migration  stemming  directly  from  the  rise  of  an  enforcement  regime  which  has  led  to 

24   see generally ina  201(a)(1), 8 u.s.c.  1151(a)(1) (describing family sponsored immigrants); ina 
 201(a)(2)(a)(i), 8 u.s.c.  1151(a)(2)(a)(i) (exempting immediate relatives from direct numerical 
limitations); ina  240a, 8 u.s.c.  1229b (describing cancellation of removal based on hardship to us 
citizen or lawful permanent resident family members); ins v. errico 385 u.s. 214 (1966) (evaluating 
the legislative history of the ina to find that family unity is a primary goal, often trumping either 
enforcement of quota provisions or keeping potentially harmful people out of the u.s.); fiallo v. bell 
430 u.s. 787 (1977) (recognizing the underlying intention and goal of immigration law to be family 
unity as demonstrated by legal preference for the immigration of certain family members); holder v. 
martinez gutierrez 132 s. ct. 2011 (2012) (affirming the fact that goals of family unity underlie or inform 
immigration law while declining to interpret every provision in the statute in the most family-friendly 
light). 
25   see ina  212(a)(6)(c)(ii), 8 u.s.c. 1182(a)(6)(c)(ii) (describing a false claim to u.s. citizenship 
for any purpose or benefit under any federal or state law as a ground of inadmissibility); ina  237(a)
(1)(h), 8 u.s.c. 1227(a)(1)(h) (allowing for a waiver of certain misrepresentations at the discretion of 
the attorney general but not allowing waiver of a false claim); sandoval v. holder 641 f.3d 982 (2011) 
(reviewing specifically whether an unaccompanied minor falsely claiming citizenship should be subject to 
the non-waivable permanent bar but deferring to the board of immigration appeals to explain the statutory 
provisions); jaen-chavez v. us atty. gen. 415 fed.appx. 964 (11th cir. 2011) (finding no reversible error 
in the bureau of immigrant affairs determination of inadmissibility for a false claim on form i-9 and no 
available waiver for this misrepresentation).

123

in harms wayhigh rates of family separation. academic and political discourses based on neoclassical, 
rational actor models were instrumental in developing the policies of deterrence that have 
failed so many and cost so much. while family-based migrants may not necessarily behave 
in drastically different ways than economic migrants, the idea that the cost of migration 
can be too great, the danger too perilous, and the punishments too harsh to keep people 
from reuniting with their loved ones needs to be rejected. the mbcs shows that people 
who consider the united states their home are willing to endure hardships at the border, 
discrimination in the united states, and the harsh penalties of an increasingly criminalized 
immigration system (martnez and slack 2013). the impacts of the current approach to 
immigration enforcement will be felt for generations, including migrants family members 
who are citizens of the united states, and will not deter those who are most adversely 
affected. we are currently at a juncture where we can change course and adopt a humane 
immigration system and inclusive approach to security that addresses our needs as one 
society connected by family, economics and the desire to make a better life for ourselves 
and our loved ones. 

references
andreas,  peter.  2000.  border  games  :  policing  the  us-mexico  divide.  ithaca:  cornell 

university press.

ajzen,  icek.  1991.  the  theory  of  planned  behavior.  organizational  behavior  and 
human  decision  processes,  50(2):  179-211.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0749-
5978(91)90020-t

bustamante,  jorge.  2002.  immigrants  vulnerability  as  subjects  of  human  rights. 

international migration review, 36(2): 333-54. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1747-7379.2002.tb00084.x

coleman,  mathew.  2007.  immigration  geopolitics  beyond  the  mexico-us  border. 

antipode 39(1): 54-76. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8330.2007.00506.x

. 2009. what counts as the politics and practice of security, and where? devolution 
and  immigrant  insecurity  after  9/11.  annals  of  the  association  of  american 
geographers 99(5): 904-13. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00045600903245888

coleman,  mathew,  and austin  kocher.  2011.  detention,  deportation,  devolution  and 
immigrant incapacitation in the us,  post-9/11. the geographical journal 177 
(3): 228-37. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-4959.2011.00424.x

cornelius, wayne. 2001. death at the border: efficacy and unintended consequences of 
us immigration control policy. population and development review 27(4): 661-
85. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1728-4457.2001.00661.x

.  2005.  controlling  unwanted  immigration:  lessons  from  the  united  states, 

1993-2004. journal of ethnic and migration studies 31 (4):775-94. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13691830500110017

124

journal on migration and human securitycornelius,  wayne  a.,  and  jessa  m.  lewis.  2007.  impacts  of  border  enforcement  on 
mexican migration : the view from sending communities. la jolla, calif.: center 
for comparative immigration studies.

danielson,  michael,  2013.  documented  failures:  the  consequences  of  immigration 
policy on the u.s. mexico border. nogales, az: jesuit relief sevices and the kino 
border 
initiative.  https://www.jrsusa.org/assets/publications/file/kino_full-
report_web.pdf. 

de genova, nicholas, and nathalie mae peutz. 2010. the deportation regime: sovereignty, 

space, and the freedom of movement. durham, nc: duke university press.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1215/9780822391340

de len, jason. 2013. the efficacy and impact of the alien transfer exit programme: 
migrant  perspectives  from  nogales,  sonora,  mexico.  imig  international 
migration 51(2): 10-23. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/imig.12062

deming, w. edwards and frederick f. stephan. 1940. on a least squares adjustment of 
a sampled frequency table when the expected marginal totals are known. the 
annals of mathematical statistics 11(4): 427-44. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1214/aoms/1177731829

dhs (department of homeland security). 2013. budget-in-brief: fiscal year 2014. in 

fierce homeland security. washington, dc: department of homeland security. 
dunn, timothy j. 1996. the militarization of the us-mexico border, 1978-1992: low-
intensity conflict doctrine comes home. austin, tx: cmas books, university of 
texas at austin.

. 2009. blockading the border and human rights: the el paso operation that 

remade immigration enforcement. austin, tx: university of texas press. 

durand, jorge. 2013. nueva fase migratoria. papeles de poblacin 19(77): 83-113.
durand,  jorge,  and  dougals  s.  massey.  2004.  crossing the border: research from the 

mexican migration project. new york: russell sage foundation.

eschbach, karl, jacqueline hagan, nestor rodriguez, ruben hernandez-leon, and stanley 
bailey. 1999. death at the border. international migration review 33 (2): 430-
54. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2547703

ewing, walter a. 2014. enemy territory: immigration enforcement in the us-mexico 

borderlands. journal on migration and human security 2(3): 198-222. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.14240/jmhs.v2i3.32

gao (government accountability office). 2010. alien smuggling: dhs needs to better 
leverage investigative resources and measure program performance along the 
southwestern border. washington, dc: government accountability office. http://
www.gao.gov/assets/310/304610.pdf.

125

in harms way. 2012. secure communities: criminal alien removals increased, but technology 
planning  improvements  needed.  washington,  dc:  government  accountability 
office. http://www.gao.gov/assets/600/592415.pdf.

hernandez, k. l. 2010. migra! a history of the u.s. border patrol. berkeley, ca: the 

university of california press.

heyman, josiah mcc. 2008. constructing a virtual wall: race and citizenship in us-

mexico border policing. journal of the southwest 50 (3): 305-33.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1353/jsw.2008.0010

.  2013.  a  voice  of  the  us  southwestern  border:  the  2012  we  the  border: 
envisioning a narrative for our future conference. journal on migration and 
human security 1(2): 60-75. http://dx.doi.org/10.14240/jmhs.v1i2.9

kanstroom, dan. 2007. deportation nation : outsiders in american history. cambridge, 

ma: harvard university press.

light,  michael  t.,  mark  hugo  lopez,  and ana  gonzalez-barrera.  2014.  the  rise  of 
federal immigration crimes. washington, dc: pew research center. http://www.
pewhispanic.org/2014/03/18/the-rise-of-federal-immigration-crimes/.

lydgate, joanna. 2010. assembly-line justice: a review of operation streamline. the 
chief justice earl warren institute on race ethnicity and diversity policy brief. 
berkeley, ca: university of california, berkeley law school. https://www.law.
berkeley.edu/files/operation_streamline_policy_brief.pdf.

martnez, daniel e. guillermo cantor, and walter ewing. 2014. no action taken: lack 
of cbp accountability in responding to complaints of abuse. washington, dc: 
immigration  policy  center.  http://www.americanimmigrationcouncil.org/sites/
default/files/no%20action%20taken_final.pdf.

martnez, daniel, and jeremy slack. 2013. what part of illegal dont you understand? 
the social consequences of criminalizing unauthorized mexican migrants in the 
united states. social & legal studies 22(4): 535-51. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0964663913484638

massey, douglas s, and kerstin gentsch. 2014. undocumented migration to the united 
states  and  the wages  of  mexican  immigrants.  international  migration  review 
48(2): 482-99. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/imre.12065

massey, douglas s., jorge durand, and nolan j. malone. 2002. beyond smoke and mirrors 
: mexican immigration in an era of economic integration. new york: russell sage 
foundation.

meyer, marureen, and adam isacson. 2013. unsafe deportation practices that put migrants 
at risk. washington, dc: washington office on latin america. http://www.wola.
org/commentary/unsafe_deportation_practices_that_put_migrants_at_risk.

126

journal on migration and human securitymiles, thomas j. and adam b. cox. forthcoming. does immigration enforcement reduce 

crime? evidence from secure communities journal of law & economics. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/680935

mountz, alison. 2010. seeking asylum : human smuggling and bureaucracy at the border. 

minneapolis, mn.: university of minnesota press.

nevins, joseph. 2002. operation gatekeeper : the rise of the illegal alien and the 

making of the us-mexico boundary. new york: routledge.

nevins, joseph, and mizue aizeki. 2008. dying to live : a story of us immigration in an 

age of global apartheid. san francisco, ca: city lights books. 

nmd (no more deaths). 2011. culture of cruelty: abuse and impunity in us border patrol 
short-term detention. tucson, az: no more deaths. http://www.cultureofcruelty.
org/documents/2011_report/.

nez,  guillermina  and  heyman,  josiah.  2007.  entrapment  processes  and  immigrant 
communities in a time of heightened border vigilance. human organization,66(4): 
354-65.

rodrguez,  ernesto  chavez,  and  graciela  martnez  caballero.  2013.  sntesis  2012: 
estadstica  migratoria.  mexico  city:  secretaria  de  gobernacin,  centro  de 
estudios migratorios, unidad de poltica migratoria, subsecretaria de poblacin, 
migracin y asuntos religosos.

rosenblum,  marc.  2013.  border  security:  immigration  enforcement  between  ports  of 

entry. washington, dc: congressional research service.

rubio  goldsmith,  raquel,  and  robin  reineke.  2010.  border  deaths  and  federal 

immigration enforcement. nacla report on the americas 43(6): 48-9.

simanski,  john.  2014.  immigration  enforcement  actions:  2013.  report  prepared  for 
the office of immigration statistics. washington, dc: department of homeland 
security. 
http://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/ois_enforcement_
ar_2013.pdf

slack, jeremy. 2015. captive bodies: migrant kidnapping and deportation in mexico. 

area. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/area.12151

spener, david. 2009. clandestine crossings: migrants and coyotes on the texas-mexico 

border. ithaca, ny: cornell university press.

trac  (transactional  records  clearinghouse).  2014.  despite  rise  in  felony  charges, 
most  immigration  convictions  remain  misdemeanors.  syracuse,  ny:  syracuse 
university. http://trac.syr.edu/immigration/reports/356/

varsanyi,  monica.  2008.  rescaling  the  alien,  rescaling  personhood:  neoliberalism, 
immigration, and the state. annals of the association of american geographers 
98(4): 877-96. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00045600802223341

127

in harms way. 2010. taking local control : immigration policy activism in us cities and states. 

palo alto, ca: stanford university press.

warren, robert. 2014. democratizing data about unauthorized residents in the united 
states: estimates and public-use data, 2010 to 2013 journal on migration and 
human security 2(4): 305-28. http://dx.doi.org/10.14240/jmhs.v2i4.38

128

journal on migration and human security