critical perspectives on 
clandestine migration facilitation: 
an overview of migrant smuggling 
research

gabriella sanchez  
university of texas at el paso

executive summary
current  representations  of  large  movements  of  migrants  and  asylum 
seekers have become part of the global consciousness. media viewers are 
bombarded  with  images  of  people  from  the  global  south  riding  atop  of 
trains, holding on to dinghies, arriving at refugee camps, crawling beneath 
wire fences or being rescued after being stranded in the ocean or the desert 
for days. images of gruesome scenes of death in the mediterranean or the 
arizona or sahara deserts reveal the inherent risks of irregular migration, 
as bodies are pulled out of the water or corpses are recovered, bagged, and 
disposed of, their identities remaining forever unknown. together, these 
images communicate a powerful, unbearable feeling of despair and crisis.  

around the world, many of these tragedies are attributed to the actions 
of  migrant  smugglers,  who  are  almost  monolithically  depicted  as  men 
from  the  global  south  organized  in  webs  of  organized  criminals  whose 
transnational reach allows them to prey on migrants and asylum seekers 
vulnerabilities.  smugglers  are  described  as  callous,  greedy,  and  violent. 
reports on efforts to contain their influence and strength are also abundant 
in official narratives of border and migration control. 

the  risks  inherent  to  clandestine  journeys  and  the  violence  people  face 
during  these  transits  must  not  be  denied.  many  smugglers  do  take 
advantage  of  the  naivet  and  helplessness  of  migrants,  refugees,  and 
asylum seekers, stripping them of their valuables and abandoning them 
to  their  fate  during  their  journeys.  yet,  as  those  working  directly  with 
migrants and asylum seekers in transit can attest, the relationships that 
emerge between smugglers and those who rely on their services are much 
more complex, and quite often, significantly less heinous than what media 
and law enforcement suggest. 

the  visibility  of  contemporary,  large  migration  movements  has  driven 
much research on migrants clandestine journeys and their human rights 
implications.  however,  the  social  contexts  that  shape  said  journeys  and 
their  facilitation  have  not  been  much  explored  by  researchers  (achilli 

 2017 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 5 number 1 (2017): 9-272015). in other words, the efforts carried out by migrants, asylum seekers, 
and their families and friends to access safe passage have hardly been the 
target of scholarly analysis, and are often obscured by the more graphic 
narratives of victimization and crime.  in short, knowledge on the ways 
migrants,  asylum  seekers,  and  their  communities  conceive,  define,  and 
mobilize mechanisms for irregular or clandestine migration is limited at 
best. 

the dichotomist script of smugglers as predators and migrants and asylum 
seekers as victims that dominates narratives of clandestine migration has 
often obscured the perspectives of those who rely on smugglers for their 
mobility. this has not only silenced migrants and asylum seekers efforts 
to reach safety, but also the collective knowledge their communities use to 
secure their mobility amid increased border militarization and migration 
controls. 

this  paper  provides  an  overview  of  contemporary,  empirical  scholarship 
on  clandestine  migration  facilitation.    it  then  argues  that  the  processes 
leading to clandestine or irregular migration are not merely the domain of 
criminal groups. rather, they also involve a series of complex mechanisms 
of protection crafted within migrant and refugee communities as attempts 
to reduce the vulnerabilities known to be inherent to clandestine journeys. 
both criminal and less nefarious efforts are shaped by and in response to 
enforcement  measures  worldwide  on  the  part  of  nation-states  to  control 
migration flows. 

devised within migrant and refugee communities, and mobilized formally 
and informally among their members, strategies to facilitate clandestine 
or  irregular  migration  constitute  a  system  of  human  security  rooted  in 
generations-long,  historical  notions  of  solidarity,  tradition,  reciprocity, 
and  affect  (khosravi  2010).  yet  amid  concerns  over  national  and  border 
security,  and  the  reemergence  of  nationalism,  said  strategies  have 
become increasingly stigmatized, traveling clandestinely being perceived 
as an inherently  and uniquely  criminal activity.  this contribution 
constitutes  an  attempt  to  critically  rethink  the  framework  present 
in  everyday  narratives  of  irregular  migration  facilitation.  it  is  a  call 
to incorporate into current protection dialogs the perceptions of those who 
rely  on  criminalized  migration  mechanisms  to  fulfill  mobility  goals,  and 
in so doing, articulate and inform solutions towards promoting safe and 
dignifying journeys for all migrants and asylum seekers in transit.

the facilitation of clandestine migration
while representations of recent migration flows into europe and the united states have 
been characterized as unprecedented and crisis-like, historical evidence suggests migratory 
flows have been significant in other times in western history. for example, donato and 
sisk (2015) demonstrated contemporary migration levels in the united states are in fact 

10

journal on migration and human securityconsiderably smaller than those taking place during the 1980s following  the passage of 
the immigration reform and control act of 1986. the historical record also shows that 
clandestine or irregular migrations, far from being under the control of organized crime, 
have been carried out through far less nefarious mechanisms. instead, they often reflect 
long-standing social relations and migration traditions (lopez-castro 1998; spener 2009; 
kandell  and  massey  2002;  ayelew  2016).  moreover,  the  social  relationships  that  are 
maintained and developed as a result of transnational migration facilitate ensuing transits, 
with people relying on friends and family members for the purpose of moving to other 
locations. these methods are significantly less violent or dark than what media and official 
accounts suggest. 
data attest that most people who eventually become undocumented or irregular migrants 
did in fact enter destination countries legally, relying on a vast system of licit and illicit 
practices. for example, the majority of newly undocumented immigrants in the united 
states in recent years have entered legally through air and land ports of entry (pew 2013; 
warren and kerwin 2015). legally issued documents to cross borders or enter a destination 
country are frequently borrowed, purchased, or rented among travel documents from friends, 
family members, and third parties (kyle and dale 2001; abel 2012). others may claim to 
be a national of a specific country, having learned to perform foreign identities that may 
allow them to pass for nationals or residents of a specific nation in order to be admitted 
into it or to avoid detection and removal (stone-cadena 2016; brigden 2016). marriage is 
also used with the purpose of being allowed admission or official authorization to reside in 
a country (tsay 2004).  
there is also a strong industry comprised by entrepreneurs who illicitly, but also legally  
and often taking advantage of gaps in laws and regulations  provide services that may 
be  conducive  of,  or  facilitate,  irregular  or  clandestine  migration.  businesses  like  travel 
agencies, employment brokers, print shops, passport or visa forgers, language schools, or 
even individuals training those seeking to travel abroad in social or cultural etiquette are 
broadly defined as brokerage. the term, in conjunction with the recognition of migrants and 
asylum seekers as owning and mobilizing their agency, seeks to encompass how migration-
related information and processes are controlled, evaluated, and processed (alpes 2012, 
90) by migrants, asylum seekers, and their families and friends in order to advance and 
complete their migratory journeys.  
combined,  all  of  these  efforts  may  lead  to  the  migration  of  many  seeking  to  reach  a 
destination.  many  other  persons,  however,  unable  to  secure  visas,  passports,  or  the 
mechanisms required to travel, may opt for another kind of service, perhaps the most visible 
and popularized form of irregular migration: the services provided by migrant smugglers.  

defining migrant smuggling
human smuggling is defined as the procurement, in order to obtain, directly or indirectly, 
a  financial  or  other  material  benefit,  of  the  illegal  entry  of  a  person  into  a  state  party 
of which the person is not a national or permanent resident (united nations 2000). it 
is most often depicted as a violent, exploitative, and criminal act controlled by groups 
of men from the global south. conceived as organized into vast, complex networks of 

11

critical perspectives on clandestine migration facilitationtransnational  reach,  and  as  operating  in  partnership  with  other  criminal  organizations 
like drug smugglers (davila 2015), human traffickers (shelly 2014), and even terrorists 
(bensman 2016), migrant smugglers are described as posing an incredible threat to the 
security of the nation-state. they are described in media, policy, and academic circles as 
greedy, as driven by the purportedly immense profits derived from the human trade, and 
as banking on the desperation of nave, desperate migrants and asylum seekers worldwide.  
there  is  in  fact  an  abundance  of  graphic  and  tragic  representations  of  the  experiences 
of  migrants  and  asylum  seekers  in  transit  at  the  hands  of  smugglers  which  provides  a 
particularly alarming portrayal of the dangers present in clandestine migration. while it is 
important to acknowledge the precariousness of smuggling transits, it is also fundamental to 
establish that globally, empirical research on smuggling and its organization is scant. most 
data pertaining to smuggling activity comes from law enforcement or other official sources 
(zhang 2007), which in turn rely on the most dramatic of failed clandestine journeys to 
further justify enforcement practices. in this context, it is not surprising that depictions of 
smuggling will most often reflect the experiences of migrants and asylum seekers who were 
the target of threats, scams, and violence before being rescued by authorities or ngos. 
the reliance on these representations despite and alongside the absence of empirically-
collected data raise critical methodological and conceptual concerns. who are the migrant 
smugglers? how are they organized? how do they perceive the work they perform, and 
how is it in turn seen by those who rely on their services? what are the motivations leading 
smugglers to engage in this activity? what do they think about the violence? and most 
importantly, are there ways to make smuggling-involved journeys safer for those who rely 
on them?
during the last decade, there has been an increase in the number of empirical engagements 
on smuggling facilitation. researchers have posed critiques of the dominant characterization 
of smuggling as a violent and predatory, urging a closer look at its community dimensions. 
this body of scholarship argues that the facilitation of irregular migration involves a multiple 
and  diverse  range  of  interactions,  many  of  which  are  far  less  tragic  or  sensationalistic 
than what politicized, mediated narratives suggest (sanchez 2015; majidi 2016). this still 
narrow body of scholarship has however articulated important critiques on the need to re-
evaluate smuggling dynamics in order to more critically engage on its reliance by migrant 
and refugee communities, and on its role at facilitating mobility amid increasing border 
enforcement and controls.  

smugglers and their views
hired  around  the  world  by  those  seeking  to  migrate  and  who  are  unable  to  secure  the 
protection  of  visas,  permits,  or  passports,  smuggling  facilitators  have  been  throughout 
history key facilitators of migration flows (gamio 1931; andreas 2013; khosravi 2010; 
chu 2010; chao-romero 2010). despite being often described as cunning, deceiving, and 
greedy, smugglers and their services maintain a systematic demand among those seeking to 
migrate in light of stepped-up migration and border enforcement measures. 
spener (2009) and zhang (2008) have argued that the continued reliance on smuggling by 
migrants and asylum seekers constitutes an indication of the practices success amid and 

12

journal on migration and human securityin spite of the frequent reports of smuggling-related tragedies and of stories pertaining to 
the abuses faced by migrants and asylum seekers in transit. in fact, reliance on smuggling 
service can also be interpreted as evidence of how immigration enforcement and control 
along  borders  has  given  place  to  the  continued  reliance  on  alternative,  underground  if 
criminalized activities to overcome mobility restrictions, and to the professionalization of 
smuggling activities (andreas 2009).
while the empirical gap on migrant smuggling is significant, a few generalizations on their 
activities and perceptions can be made on the grounds of studies involving direct contact 
with smugglers and their clients. the following sections describe some of the findings of 
this body of work.      
smugglers and their backgrounds. while the ethnographic evidence suggests smugglers 
do not present a unique or specific demographic profile, some general observations can be 
made. most smugglers are migrants or asylum seekers themselves who provide services 
on behalf of friends, acquaintances, and family members relying on their past migration 
experiences (stone-cadena 2016; maher 2016). many tend to share the nationality or place 
of origin of their clientele (zhang 2008). in terms of their immigration status, they are likely 
to be or have been irregular migrants at some point in their lives (sanchez 2015), although 
the  participation  of  authorized  residents  and  citizens  from  countries  where  smuggling 
activities take place is also commonplace (achilli 2015). men as well as women of all 
ages participate in the provision of smuggling services;1 however, the majority of those 
arrested for smuggling and smuggling-related offenses are men (despite women also being 
key actors of smuggling facilitation) (zhang, chin, and miller 2007; sanchez 2016). the 
majority of facilitators tend to be members of highly marginalized communities  working 
class, low-income laborers, residing in or traveling through areas of high migration flows. 
in short, data indicate that smugglers are ordinary citizens from multiple backgrounds. at 
best, they appear to share a highly entrepreneurial drive, further identifying themselves as 
self-starters and as enjoying working independently (zhang 2007; achilli 2015).
the  social  organization  of  migrant  smuggling.  migrant-smuggling  groups  tend  to  be 
constituted primarily by groups of friends and family members. entry into the smuggling 
market mostly occurs in two ways: through interactions with friends and family members 
already involved in smuggling activity (zhang 2008; chin 1999), or when approached to 
participate in the smuggling process in the context of their own migratory journey (achilli 
2015), most often in exchange for a reduction of their smuggling fees (sanchez 2015). tasks 
are gendered. women most often perform feminized tasks (cooking, cleaning, childcare), 
as well as financial transactions (like cashing checks and ensuring fee payments have been 
made or wired) (sanchez 2016; zhang, chin and miller 2007). men are more frequently 
involved in guiding and driving groups, acting as lookouts, recruiters, and guards (spener 
2009). 
smuggling requires no specialized or technical training or investments (zhang 2007), with 
facilitators relying on the skills or resources they already possess  the ability to drive, 
owning a dwelling or a vehicle, speaking the local language, or having knowledge of local 
1    researchers  on  the  us-mexico  border  and  north  africa  have  also  documented  reports  of  minors 
participating in the smuggling market who receive monetary compensation or who pay off their transits by 
performing smuggling-related tasks (iom 2016; moreno and avedano 2015).

13

critical perspectives on clandestine migration facilitationroads (sanchez 2014). while border enforcement and militarization has made crossings 
more challenging, smugglers consistently rely on their knowledge of their territories and 
on the strength of their connections, rather than on technological savviness or skill. some 
scholars have suggested that increased controls have led not just to higher smuggling prices 
but also to smugglers reliance on more sophisticated technology and equipment (andreas 
2009). it is perhaps more accurate to point out that most smugglers and their clients rely 
on basic cellphones and radios (mcauliffe 2016; newell et al. 2016) for communication 
purposes.  the  use  of  smart  phones,  and  most  recently,  of  social  media  by  smugglers 
to  recruit  and  guide  their  clients  has  also  been  documented  by  some  scholars  (petrillo 
2016; mcauliffe 2016), although said usage should be interpreted as a reflection of the 
affordability and availability of mobile technology, rather than as a marker of smugglers 
sophistication. 
data  indicate  that  smuggling  facilitators  work  independently,  relying  on  their  personal 
resources and social contacts. they perform a single, highly specific task only (guiding a 
group through the desert, cooking, recruiting, driving) (zhang 2007; campana 2016) which 
is performed in coordination with other facilitators. facilitators are not always known to 
each other  they may live in different cities, states and even countries. this is also an 
effective protection mechanism organic to smuggling operations: in the event one facilitator 
is arrested, he or she cannot identify others involved (zhang 2008). simultaneously, it is 
important to reiterate that significant portions of the communications among smuggling 
facilitators take place through mobile technology (including cell phone-based applications) 
and social media, further eliminating the need for face-to-face interactions. the tasks, when 
performed effectively and in coordination, will lead clients to their final destination.
it  is  common  to  find  smuggling  facilitators  who  perform  coordinating  roles.  they  put 
facilitators, clients, and community members in contact; help monitor specific journeys; 
and settle the frequent financial disputes among smugglers and their customers, and among 
smugglers  themselves.  coordination,  however,  should  not  be  interpreted  as  a  synonym 
for leadership. occasionally individual smugglers may assume temporary oversight for 
a particular journey or a specific group of clients, yet each facilitator is still individually 
responsible  of  a  specific  task  during  the  journey. temporary  oversight  typically  comes 
to an end once clients have successfully completed a specific stage of their journeys or 
reached their destination. while law enforcement and media often articulate smuggling 
as  organized  in  complex  and  hierarchical  networks  (aronowitz,  2012),  ethnographers 
have identified that the ability to improvise and make decisions independently (brigden 
2016) are essential characteristics of successful smuggling journeys. in other words, most 
smuggling groups are organized horizontally, and lack centralized, permanent leadership 
and hierarchical mechanisms (spener 2009, 147; zhang and chin 2002; sanchez 2015) 
as they depend on the ability, availability, and skill of individual facilitators.  the absence 
of central leadership does not suggest charismatic facilitators with leadership attributes 
or inclinations do not exist, but rather than the execution and effectiveness of smuggling 
activities  are  more  dependent  on  the  collaborations  among  individuals  rather  than  on 
leadership. 
clients perception of smuggling. despite the infamous reputation smuggling facilitators 
have in the media, being a smuggler is far from a frowned upon activity within migrant 

14

journal on migration and human securityand refugee communities (majidi 2016; koser 2008). access to or information on reliable, 
trusted facilitators becomes critical in anticipation of clandestine journeys, as friends and 
families of migrants and asylum seekers and the travelers themselves are vastly aware of 
the challenges inherent to their passages and seek to reduce them (alpes 2012). those 
seeking to travel often conduct extensive research on their potential smuggling options 
well in advance of their journeys. they consult and solicit references from other friends 
and relatives who have successfully traveled in the past, meet with smugglers in person 
or over the phone, and shop around until a suitable option is found.  while smuggling 
activities are illicit and must remain hidden from the authorities, they cannot be entirely 
secret or private, as the business relies on referrals and on smugglers accessibility to their 
clients. in this sense, the smuggling market is, as other illicit practices, more mundane, 
consensual, and public than imagined (zaitch 2005, 201).
in turn, the ability of a smuggling group or an individual facilitator to conduct business 
most often depends on the quality of his or her referrals from past clients and smuggling 
collaborators (martinez and slack 2016; zhang 2008). reports on factors like reliability, 
punctuality, risk levels, cost, and quality of transportation are as important in the decision 
to travel with a specific smuggler as are the more subjective, affective issues like kinship 
proximity,  levels  of  respect  shown  towards  women  and  the  elderly,  quality  of  care  via 
personal  interactions,  friendliness,  honesty,  cleanliness,  and  quality  of  room  and  board 
provided (vogt 2016). combined, these factors play a role in clients decisions to travel 
with a specific smuggling facilitator, and on the ability of facilitators to generate and secure 
business for themselves and others. 
while clients do not necessarily perceive the work performed by smugglers as criminal, 
they do recognize their actions as illicit, and are fully aware of the legal implications that 
an arrest can have on their future and that of the smuggler, including incarceration, possible 
legal charges, and future inadmissibility (alpes 2012; chu 2010). but given the limited 
options available for transnational mobility, clients most often describe the work of the 
smuggler as compulsory, in some cases even altruistic. to some, smuggling constitutes a 
necessary evil amid the challenges posed by immigration and border enforcement.
smugglers  self-perceptions  and  motives.  while  the  main  motivation  behind  their 
participation in the facilitation of clandestine migration is securing financial or in-kind 
returns, smugglers provide varied rationales for their involvement, perhaps due to the very 
scrutiny they face.  for smugglers who have a migrant or refugee background, helping others 
like themselves get access to protection appears to be a constant theme. they express an 
awareness of the challenges encountered by migrants and asylum seekers in transit having 
experienced them themselves (achilli 2015). smuggling services constitute therefore a way 
to support other migrants and asylum seekers in their paths toward mobility and security. 
to other facilitators, smuggling is a way to pay back a favor from the past, the times when 
other smugglers assisted them in the context of their own journeys. in the context of her 
research on smuggling along the us-mexico border, a smuggler interviewed by sanchez 
stated: i am just paying the favor forward (2015). she also identified cases of women 
who were invited to take on smuggling tasks during times of unemployment or illness so as 
to supplement their already low incomes in service and hospitality occupations.  

15

critical perspectives on clandestine migration facilitationmost smugglers justify their participation in strictly utilitarian terms: the returns are often 
minimal, but welcome. in addition to constituting an income-generating mechanism, some 
smugglers perceive the work they perform as building social capital investment for the 
future  a community-based form of insurance. they often see their participation as a 
future way to cash-in the favors provided to migrants, asylum seekers, and their families 
(sanchez 2016). a small number of facilitators manage to build a client base and a positive 
reputation, which over time, and as a result of the notions and community practices of 
reciprocity ruling communities, can ensure the duration of an enterprise (spener 2009). 
most  clients  express  gratitude  for  their  smugglers  services  when  their  journeys  had  a 
positive outcome, or as a result of the attention and the care provided to those traveling 
with them (hagan 2008). 
the  economy  of  smuggling.  the  smuggling  market  is  often  described  as  incredibly 
profitable,  with  its  returns  matching  or  even  exceeding  those  of  drug  trafficking  (soo 
2015).    however,  estimating  the  size  of  the  migrant  smuggling  market  in  terms  of  its 
finances is a virtually impossible proposition. smugglers do not keep official records of 
their transactions, they may charge different fees to different clients, many rely on informal 
forms of banking (koser 2008; majidi 2016), and some are paid in kind while others may 
charge no fees at all. in other words, costs and profits associated with clandestine travels 
vary considerably depending on locations, clients, and facilitators. 
there  are,  however,  a  few  generalizations  that  can  be  made  regarding  the  smuggling 
economy. smuggling fees are dependent on multiple variables, with distance to and from a 
desired destination being just one of them. they are also tied to the means of transportation 
used, routes, access to state and non-state actors that may expedite transits, and to documents 
that may facilitate them (izcara- palacios 2013). the age, gender, or health condition of the 
person who seeks to travel is also a matter of consideration for smugglers, who often must 
deal with the impact of transporting a sick or vulnerable migrant upon the rest of a group 
(hagan  2008).  some  facilitators  provide  specialized  services  for  clients  like  children, 
pregnant women, and the elderly that reduce travel times and exposure to risks (sanchez 
2016), at a cost several times higher than those pertaining to a regular trek. families 
and friends in both countries of origin and destination cover these additional fees with the 
intention of improving the chances of a successful and safe journey. 
given  the  cost  of  their  services,  smugglers  often  provide  guarantees.  for  example, 
smuggling fees are deposited with a third party and only when the arrival of the migrant to 
his or her destination is confirmed are the funds released to the smuggler. other smugglers 
offer a certain number of crossing attempts (guevara-gonzalez 2015) while others do not 
charge unless the client reaches his or her destination (zhang 2008).   
while there is an abundance of variables that help determine smuggling costs, a correlation 
between the cost of a journey and its level of risk does seem to exist. migrants with access 
to sources of financial and social capital are more likely to travel through faster and safer 
mechanisms,  exponentially  reducing  the  levels  of  risk  they  face.  the  opposite  applies 
to those unable to secure or access funds or connections, as their options to protection 
are minimal or not readily accessible (martinez 2015). unequal access to protection is 
also pervasive in smuggling. low-income migrants with limited knowledge of migration 
processes  (most  often  women  and  children  traveling  alone)  are  more  likely  to  endure 

16

journal on migration and human securityviolence, detention, extreme levels of environmental exposure, and  death, compared to 
those who possess better knowledge (pickering and cochrane 2013). the most vulnerable 
migrants  are  more  frequently  the  subject  of  scams,  extortion,  kidnapping,  or  forced 
disappearance (cndh 2009; cndh 2011). in brief, higher smuggling fees often imply 
reduced travel time and environmental exposure, travelling along safer routes, and limited 
risk of detection. these advantages, however, are not always available to the poorest of 
migrants and asylum seekers in transit.
smuggling journeys are financed in a number of ways. the ethnographic record suggests 
that  costs  are  covered  by  friends  and  family  members  of  those  who  travel.  migrants, 
asylum seekers, and their families take loans, spend savings, sell personal property, or set 
up payment plans. a journey takes place only after the terms associated with the transit 
have been established and agreed upon by all parties. the existence of these agreements, 
however, is often not enough to guarantee that the terms will be respected, especially when 
the ultimate destination of the migrant is a distant or non-traditional country.2 migrants 
report smugglers often charge additional fees, fail to deliver contracted services, or even 
disappear prior to any services being provided or completed, taking any fees that already 
have been paid with them (oleary 2009). 
most  smugglers  however  are  open  to  negotiating  their  fees,  given  the  socio-economic 
circumstances faced by their clientele and their market pressures (casillas 2010; sanchez 
2015;  maher  2016).  many  migrants  or  asylum  seekers  and  their  families  run  out  of 
resources to cover their fees, having then to devise arrangements with facilitators to pay off 
service by performing smuggling-related tasks themselves (sanchez 2015) or working out 
payment plans (koser 2008). while most smuggling facilitators favor negotiations, many 
threaten their clients, and many may engage in acts of extreme violence, like physical or 
sexual abuse, extortion, kidnapping, and torture in order to obtain their fees (cndh 2011).
lastly, despite the often exorbitant amounts that are quoted in connection with smuggling 
costs, research indicates that individual facilitators earnings vary considerably (sanchez 
2015; zhang 2008). once all the costs associated with a journey have been recovered, the 
remaining amount is split among those who participated in its facilitation. compensation 
generally depends on the task performed, the number of clients, and the number of facilitators 
involved.  on  the  us-mexico  border,  compensation  also  varies  greatly  across  genders. 
tasks typically performed by women (cooking, cleaning, and cashing wire transfers) often 
involve lesser compensation than those executed by men (like driving and guiding groups 
through the desert) (sanchez 2016). these limitations also mean that few people consider 
smuggling  a  full-time  occupation.  most  facilitators  report  holding  regular  jobs  in  the 
mainstream economy or support themselves by performing additional informal forms of 
labor (zhang 2007; sanchez 2015). in other words, smuggling constitutes in the majority 
of cases only a supplemental income-generating strategy, its structure only allowing for 
limited, seasonal, and occasional job opportunities. and since most facilitators earning 
abilities are already limited, this also translates into their smuggling earnings being almost 
immediately re-circulated into the local economy to cover basic needs like food, rent, or 
school supplies (sanchez 2015). 

2   majidi (2016) has identified that in long-distance journeys, like those involving transit from pakistan and 
afghanistan into europe, the initial net of protection provided by local smugglers becomes more tenuous as 
the distance from the place of origin increases.

17

critical perspectives on clandestine migration facilitationsmuggling, violence, and organized crime
representations of the migrant smuggling market describe it as plagued by violence and 
risk. we must keep in mind, however, that violence does not occur in a vacuum. most 
references to violence in human smuggling focus on the persona of the smuggler, leading 
audiences to forget the role of structural violence in dictating the forms of interpersonal 
violence that take place in the context of clandestine migrations. 
violence  in  smuggling  should  be  understood  in  the  context  of  the  global  migration 
enforcement system, which has been conducive of heightened states of precarity and risk 
among those who travel irregularly. however, it has been primarily narrowed to simplistic 
characterizations where smugglers appear as predators, organized in transnational networks 
of  far  reach  whose  spread  is  explained  as  the  result  of  globalization  and  population 
migration that allow criminal organizations to grow increasingly unattached to a specific 
territory (varese 2011:3-4).
the reports of physical violence, sexual assault, homicide, labor trafficking, extortion, and 
kidnapping occurring along the migrant and refugee trail must not be ignored. yet renouncing 
them far from provides contextual or theoretical insights into their occurrence. illegality 
alone is not sufficient to create high levels of violence in criminal markets (reuter 2009), 
particularly in smuggling, where the service being sold is protection  even if limited or 
scant. scholars have argued that engaging in violence against migrants and asylum seekers 
as  a  smuggling  facilitator  would  be  impractical  and  counterproductive,  as  the  business 
depends on referrals from satisfied customers (zhang 2007; spener 2009). furthermore, 
smugglers are not the only characters that engage in activities that negatively impact the 
safety of those in transit. abuses by state actors (cndh 2009), robbers (oleary 2009), 
and even the general public (lazaridis 2015) have an impact on migrant and refugee well-
being and security. furthermore, physical violence is far from being the only cause behind 
migrant and refugee death. the work of rubio goldsmith et al. (2006), and that of martinez 
et al. (2013) have established the correlation between migrant deaths and environmental 
exposure emerging from migrants opting for more remote and isolated routes in order to 
avoid detection at the hands of law enforcement. 
claims that smuggling is in the hands of transnational criminal networks must also be treated 
with caution. globalization should not be simply translated as a synonym of the ability of 
an organization or group to become mobile or operate at a different location at will (varese 
2011, 4). most smuggling operations are set up at the local level (campana 2016; zhang 
2007; chu 2010) or within migrant or asylum seeker communities (majidi 2016; sanchez 
2015). while interactions and encounters with members of other criminal organizations 
do take place, they suggest, rather than the existence of transnational collaborations or 
partnerships among criminal groups, the presence of communications and exchanges among 
them, and the sharing of routes and most likely similar mechanisms for their operations, 
but not the domination or take-over of a specific group (wolf 2012). furthermore, we must 
also remember that the evidence shows smugglers work independently, connecting with 
multiple other facilitators and not for a single, specific group. 
lastly, research on criminal activity shows that violence takes specific forms in specific 
markets,  and  is  not  random  in  nature  (reuter  2009).  while  clandestine  migration  is 

18

journal on migration and human securityinherently precarious, the forms of violence that are present in any market are also specific 
to its context. in fact, not all clandestine journeys will be violent or involve dire encounters 
with organized crime. research indicates that the level of vulnerability and exposure that 
a person in transit will encounter is connected to the amount of social and financial capital 
that has been deployed in the context of his or her journey (martinez 2015). some migrants 
and asylum seekers in fact never come in contact with anyone other than facilitators along 
their journeys, while others (most often, the poorest and most vulnerable of migrants) will 
systematically be the targets of crime and abuse. the latter, in turn, is more the result of 
their very vulnerability and visibility, than that of the spread of global criminal networks. 
there are other manifestations of violence that appear to be more systematically prevalent 
in the market. the most common kind is the one emerging from interpersonal conflict. 
arguments among smuggling facilitators, and smuggling facilitators and their clients are 
rather  common,  especially  over  the  payment  of  smuggling  fees  (sanchez  2015).  many 
facilitators may opt to charge additional fees on top of previously agreed prices, and may 
even refuse to continue transporting migrants or asylum seekers to their destinations if 
such charges are not covered. others may hold their clients until smuggling fees that were 
promised are covered. migrants may also fail to abide by the terms of their journeys. while 
the  relationship  between  the  smuggler  and  the  person  in  transit  may  seem  to  uniquely 
favor the former, migrants often threaten smugglers with providing poor reviews of their 
experience, which may in fact damage the smugglers reputation and make the possibility 
of conducting future business complicated. most often, parties negotiate (casillas 2010) 
to avoid the loss of capital or fees, or being detected by or reported to law enforcement 
authorities. facilitators also reconcile their differences among each other in order to ensure 
continued business opportunities.  
one of the activities that has generated considerable concern in clandestine migration is the 
incidence of kidnapping among migrants and asylum seekers in transit. the practice appears 
to be most prevalent in the horn of africa-north africa markets and in the us-mexico and 
mexican contexts. on the us-mexico border, kidnapping acts are most often described as 
carried out by crews who rob smugglers of the migrants they transport (martinez 2015; 
slack 2015; sanchez 2015). these actors, known in the region as bajadores3 retain migrants 
until a ransom fee from their friends or families is secured. migrants report being subjected 
to  emotional  abuse,  intimidation,  beatings,  sexual  abuse,  and  torture  (cndh  2011). 
an almost identical practice occurs among eritrean and sudanese asylum seekers, with 
families in the diaspora being contacted to cover large sums of money in order to avoid or 
stop the further victimization of a victim in transit and to secure his or her release (ayalew 
2016). many times the perpetrators of these forms of violence are migrants themselves, 
who are unable to cover their ransom fees and, often under pressure from captors, engage 
in the commission of acts of victimization against other migrants (cndh 2011; izcara 
palacios 2015). while reports of sexual violence against migrant women have occupied the 
attention of most researchers and policy makers, men are consistently the target of sexual 
intimidation, humiliation, and violence (cndh 2011; sanchez 2014). in some contexts, 
state  actors  have  been  identified  as  working  alongside  those  engaging  in  the  criminal 

3   the term is the spanish word for unload. in northern mexican popular culture the term was typically 
used in drug trafficking in reference to the amateurish crews that would rob drug traffickers of their drug 
cargo during transit.

19

critical perspectives on clandestine migration facilitationexploitation of migrants and asylum seekers in transit. mexicos national commission for 
human rights, for example, has repeatedly denounced the involvement of members of that 
countrys immigration enforcement corps, the national institute for migration, in practices 
that afflict the safety of migrants traveling through that country.

discussion and way forward
through the mobilization of graphic images and tragic stories of migrant victimization, 
migrant smuggling has been established as the main mechanism behind migrant and asylum 
seeker flows. as part of these narratives, the public is told that clandestine migration is under 
the control of transnational criminal organizations that exploit migrants and the displaced, 
prey on their desperation, exploit them financially, and victimize them physically, sexually, 
and emotionally.  
there is no doubt that exploitative and violent practices exist in the migrant smuggling 
market,  and  that  many  smugglers  do  prey  upon  migrants  and  asylum  seekers. yet  the 
conditions of vulnerability faced by those in transit are rooted first and foremost in their 
inability to fulfill the ever rigorous requirements imposed by the nation state to secure 
visas  and  passports.  critical  scholarship  on  smuggling  has  therefore  challenged  the 
oversimplified narratives of irregular migration, especially those that seek to construct the 
practice in a manner that exempts the state from its role as generating the conditions that 
ultimately influence the decision of migrants and asylum seekers to travel with smugglers.  
this contribution summarized current knowledge on the facilitation of smuggling activities 
derived from empirical and critical research on the facilitation of clandestine migration. 
it outlined how work within migrant and refugee communities indicates that smuggling 
processes  are  not  only  criminal  in  nature,  but  that  they  are  often  community-initiated, 
rooted  in  historical  traditions  of  social  obligation  and  reciprocity  that  ultimately  and 
collectively seek to provide a system of protection for its members. as these mechanisms 
are  not  authorized  by  the  state,  they  are  set  up  to  constitute  a  form  of  human  security 
from below. the data also indicate that few smuggling facilitators are members of wealthy 
transnational criminal networks. they are instead community members, often migrant and 
asylum seekers themselves who employ their knowledge, skills, and social connections 
in the facilitation of smuggling in order to supplement their income. while the financial 
motivations behind smugglers participation in the market must be acknowledged, there is 
no indication that profits are destined or shipped to any global, centralized, transnational 
leader or organization. rather, earnings stay within the working class, often marginalized 
communities where migrants, asylum seekers, and facilitators come together, and are in 
fact almost immediately recirculated to cover basic needs like rent or food. 
in light of these findings, what are the consequences of ignoring the community dimensions 
of smuggling at a time of large movements of migrants and asylum seekers? research 
points at the following implications connected with border enforcement and migration and 
smuggling criminalization practices:

  the increased criminalization of smuggling has transformed what historically and 
culturally has constituted a community-based and -centered activity. the work of 

20

journal on migration and human securityizcara-palacios in mexico, for example, shows that reliable, experienced facilitators 
have been forced out of the market, concerned over the risk of detection and arrest 
and the imposition of fees by organized crime that impact their earnings, leading less 
experienced facilitators to enter the market, which increases migrant and refugee 
risks.

  anti-smuggling law enforcement operations hardly ever lead to the capture of 
smuggling leaders since as evidenced by the ethnographic record, hierarchical 
leadership is virtually non-existent in the facilitation of smuggling. missbach and 
sinanu (2011) identified that instead, the members of marginalized, working-class 
communities, as well as asylum seekers, migrants, and people of color are the ones 
who are more likely to be detained under smuggling charges, and that their detention 
and prosecution have no impact on deterring smuggling from occurring.

  anti-smuggling activities also have a serious economic impact upon migrants, 

asylum seekers, and their families. enforcement has raised smuggling costs. most 
often law enforcement confiscates any fees in possession of a facilitator as evidence 
of his or her criminal activity. fees are not returned to migrants or asylum seekers 
even in the presence of evidence of violence or victimization. this has a grave 
impact on the finances of families who might have become indebted in the course of 
financing migrant and asylum seeker journeys, many of whom are forced to attempt 
their crossings again, or to disappear to avoid the implications of unpayable debts. 
the states actions, in turn, heighten the vulnerability of migrants and their families.
  concerns over detection by law enforcement force migrants and asylum seekers to 

opt for more hidden, remote, and dangerous routes to reach their destinations. at 
these locations, the likelihood of receiving help in the event of an emergency is slim, 
and the probability of becoming prey of other forms of crime increases, as the case 
of the interactions between drug and human smuggling in mexico documented by 
casillas indicate.4

  migration criminalization efforts have increasingly expanded to include humanitarian 

attempts on the part of individuals, civil organizations, and ngos to transport 
migrants and asylum seekers. cases of activists being charged for providing 
humanitarian assistance to migrants and asylum seekers have been reported in 
europe and have been at the center of federal litigation in the united states (coutin 
2012; van liempt 2016).

in  summary,  smuggling  journeys  are  built  upon  collective,  accumulated,  and  also 
improvised forms of knowledge acquired, developed, and shared by those in transit and 
their communities. enforcement controls, including anti-smuggling initiatives that rely on 
the mobilization of notions of organized crime and that focus on rescue efforts alone, will 
continue to have little to no deterrent impact on migrant and refugee flows.  
the very practice of irregular migration  migrant smuggling included  continues to 
depend on the mobilization of knowledge among migrants and their communities. this 

4   mass graves and massacres along sections of the migrant trail in mexico under the territorial influence of 
mexican drug trafficking organizations suggest interactions that severely impact the security of migrants, 
primarily those from central america, who are more likely to rely on this route (casillas 2010).

21

critical perspectives on clandestine migration facilitationdoes not suggest that the role of smugglers as agents of mobility is always altruistic or 
humane. rather it highlights how mobility efforts have increasingly and often mistakenly 
become criminalized, in the process leading to the emergence of dynamics and practices 
that further the vulnerability of those in transit. anti-smuggling activity punishes not the 
feared transnational networks or cartels so often claimed to be behind its facilitation, but 
marginalized people along the migrant trail. by empirically evidencing the socio-cultural 
dimensions of irregular or clandestine migration facilitation as a form of protection from 
below,  this  article  seeks  to  re-energize  the  academic  dialogue  on  the  topic,  calling  for 
empirically-informed research that can lead to policy and practices that stop the actions of 
predatory smugglers and improve the safety of those on the move.  

references
abel, rebecca m. 2012. whos bringing the children?: expanding the family exemption 
for child smuggling offenses. michigan law review first impressions 110:52-
62.

achilli, luigi. 2015. the smuggler: hero or felon? policy brief, robert schuman centre 

for advanced studies. florence: european university institute.

alpes, maybritt j. 2012. bushfalling at all cost: the economy of migratory knowledge 
in  anglophone  cameroon  1.  african  diaspora  5(1):90-115.  https://doi.
org/10.1163/187254612x646189. 

andreas, peter. 2009. border games: policing the us-mexico divide. ithaca, ny: cornell 

university press.

.  2013.  smuggler  nation:  how  illicit  trade  made america.  new york:  oxford 

university press. 

aronowitz, alexis. 2012. the human trafficking-organized crime nexus. in routledge 
handbook  of  transnational  organized  crime,  edited  by  felia allum  and  stan 
gilmour. london: routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203698341.ch14. 

ayalew, tekalign mengiste. 2016.  the struggle of mobility: organising high risk migration 
from the horn of africa. london: opendemocracy. https://www.opendemocracy.
net/beyondslavery/hsr/tekalign-ayalew-mengiste/struggle-of-mobility- 
organising-high-risk-migration-from-horn.

bensman, todd. 2016. the ultra-marathoners of human smuggling: how to combat the 
dark networks that can move terrorists over american land borders. homeland 
security affairs (12).

brigden, noelle. 2016. improvised transnationalism: clandestine migration at the border 
of  anthropology  and  international  relations.  international  studies  quarterly 
60(2):343-54. https://doi.org/10.1093/isq/sqw010.  

22

journal on migration and human securitycampana,  paolo.  2016.  the  structure  of  human trafficking:  lifting  the  bonnet  on  a 
nigerian  transnational  network.  british  journal  of  criminology  56(1):68-86. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/bjc/azv027. 

casillas, rodolfo. 2010. masacre de transmigrantes: reflexiones e interrogantes sobre 
los significados del asesinato de 72 migrantes. foreign affairs latin america 
4(10):52-59.

chao-romero,  robert.  2011.  the  chinese  in  mexico,  1882-1940.  tucson,  arizona: 

university of arizona press.

chin, ko-lin. 1999. smuggled chinese: clandestine immigration to the united states. 

philadelphia: temple university press.

chu,  julie  2010.  cosmologies  of  credit:  transnational  mobility  and  the  politics 
in  china.  durham:  duke  university  press.  https://doi.

of  destination 
org/10.1215/9780822393160. 

cndh  (comisin  nacional  de  los  derechos  humanos).  2009.  informe  especial  de  la 
comisin nacional de los derechos humanos sobre los casos de secuestro de 
migrantes. mexico city: cndh.

. 2011. informe especial sobre secuestro de migrantes en mxico. mexico city: 

cndh.

coutin,  susan  bibler.  1995.  smugglers  or  samaritans  in  tucson, arizona:  producing 
and  contesting  legal  truth.  american  ethnologist  22(3):549-71.  https://doi.
org/10.1525/ae.1995.22.3.02a00050. 

davila,  anna.  2015.  drug  cartels:  where  human  smuggling  and  drug  trafficking 
meet  today.  the  huffington  post,  june  16.  http://www.huffingtonpost.com/
ana-davila/drug-cartels-where-human-trafficking-and-human-smuggling-meet-
today_b_7588408.html.

donato, katharine, and blake sisk. 2015. childrens migration to the united states from 
mexico and central america: evidence from the mexican and latin american 
migration projects. journal on migration and human security 3(1):58. https://
doi.org/10.14240/jmhs.v3i1.43. 

gamio,  manuel.  1931.  the  life  story  of  the  mexican  immigrant:  autobiographic 

documents. new york: dover publications.

guevara gonzlez, yaatsil. 2015. migracin de trnsito y ayuda humanitaria: apuntes 
sobre las casas de migrantes en la ruta migratoria del pacfico sur en mxico. the 
journal of the international association of inter-american studies 8(1).

hagan,  jacqueline.  2008.  migration  miracle:  faith,  hope  and  meaning  on  the 

undocumented journey. cambridge and london: harvard university press.

iom (international organization for migration). 2016. egyptian unaccompanied migrant 

children: a case study on irregular migration. cairo: iom egypt.

23

critical perspectives on clandestine migration facilitationizcara-palacios,  simn  p.  2013.  corrupcin  y  contrabando  de  migrantes  en  estados 

unidos. poltica y gobierno 20(1):79-106.

. 2015. coyotaje and drugs: two different businesses. bulletin of latin american 

research 34(3):324-39. https://doi.org/10.1111/blar.12296. 

kandell,  william,  and  douglas  massey.  2002.  the  culture  of  mexican  migration: a 
theoretical  and  empirical analysis.  social  forces  8(3):981-1004.  https://doi.
org/10.1353/sof.2002.0009. 

khosravi, shahram. 2010. illegal traveller: an autoethnography of borders. london: 

mcmillan. https://doi.org/10.1057/9780230281325. 

kyle,  david,  and  john  dale.  2001.  smuggling  the  state  back  in: agents  of  human 
in  global  human  smuggling:  comparative 
smuggling  reconsidered.. 
perspectives, edited by david kyle and rey koslowski, 29-57. baltimore, md: 
johns hopkins university press.  

koser,  khalid.  2008.  why  migrant  smuggling  pays.  international  migration  46(2): 

3-26. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2435.2008.00442.x. 

lazaridis,  gabriella.  2015.  irregular  migration  and  undocumented  migrants    the 
abjects.  international  migration  into  europe,  10-26.  london:  palgrave 
macmillan. https://doi.org/10.1057/9781137384966_2. 

lopez-castro, gustavo. 1998. coyotes and alien smuggling. migration between mexico 
and  the  united  states:  binational  study  3.  mexico  city:  mexican  ministry  of 
foreign affairs, us commission on immigration reform.

maher, stephanie. 2016. friends and handlers: facilitating passage out of west africa. 
conference  paper,  critical  approaches  to  irregular  migration  facilitation: 
dismantling the smuggler narrative conference, april 5-6. florence: european 
university institute.

majidi, nassim. 2016. historical and community dimensions of smuggling in afghanistan 
and  somalia.  conference  paper,  critical  approaches  to  irregular  migration 
facilitation: dismantling the smuggler narrative conference, april 5-6. florence: 
european university institute.

martinez, daniel. 2015. coyote use in an era of heightened border enforcement: new 
evidence  from  the  arizona-sonora  border.  journal  of  ethnic  and  migration 
studies 42(1):103-19. https://doi.org/10.1080/1369183x.2015.1076720. 

martinez, daniel, and jeremy slack. 2016. what makes a good smuggler? customer 
satisfaction  among  undocumented  migrants.  conference  paper,  critical 
approaches  to  irregular  migration  facilitation:  dismantling  the  smuggler 
narrative conference, april 5-6. florence: european university institute. 

martinez,  daniel,  robin  reineke,  raquel  rubio-goldsmith,  and  bruce  parks.  2014. 
structural violence and migrant deaths in southern arizona: data from the pima 

24

journal on migration and human securitycounty office of the medical examiner, 1990-2013. journal of migration and 
human security 2(4):257-86. https://doi.org/10.14240/jmhs.v2i4.35. 

mcauliffe, marie. 2016. the appification of migration: a million migrants? there are 
apps  for  that.  asia  and  the  pacific  policy  society,  january  20.  http://www.
policyforum.net/the-appification-of-migration/.

missbach,  antje,  and  frieda  sinanu.  2011.  the  scum  of  the  earth?  foreign  people 
smugglers  and  their  local  counterparts  in  indonesia.  journal  of  current 
southeast asian affairs 30(4):57-87.

moreno, jose, and rosa m. avedano. 2015. arrinconados por la realidad: menores de 

circuito. estudios fronterizos 16(31):207-38.

newell, bryce clayton, ricardo gomez, and vernica e. guajardo. 2016. information 
seeking, technology use, and vulnerability among migrants at the united states
mexico border. the information society 32(3):176-91. https://doi.org/10.1080/0
1972243.2016.1153013. 

oleary, ana. 2009. the abcs of migration costs: assembling, bajadores, and coyotes. 

migration letters 6(1):27.

petrillo, enza r. 2016. the securitization of the eu external borders and the rise of 
human smuggling along the eastern mediterranean route: the case of afghan 
unaccompanied  minors.  in  migration  in  the  mediterranean:  socio-economic 
perspectives, edited by elena ambrosetti and donatella strangio, 105-25. london: 
routledge.

pew hispanic center. 2006. modes of entry for the unauthorized migrant population. 
http://www.pewhispanic.org/

washington,  dc:  pew  hispanic  center. 
files/2011/10/19.pdf.

pickering,  sharon,  and  brandy  cochrane.  2013.  irregular  border-crossing  deaths  and 
gender:  where,  how  and  why  women  die  crossing  borders.  theoretical 
criminology 17(1):27-48. https://doi.org/10.1177/1362480612464510. 

reuter, peter. 2009. systemic violence in drug markets. crime, law and social change 

52:275-84. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10611-009-9197-x. 

rubio-goldsmith, raquel, melissa mccormick, daniel martinez, and ines duarte. 2006. 
the funnel effect and recovered bodies of unauthorized migrants processed by 
the pima county office of the medical examiner, 1990-2005. tucson, arizona: 
binational migration institute, university of arizona

sanchez,  gabriella.  2015.  border  crossings  and  human  smuggling.  london  and  new 

york: routledge.

. 2016. womens participation in the facilitation of human smuggling: the case 
of the us southwest. geopolitics 21(2):387-406. https://doi.org/10.1080/146500
45.2016.1140645. 

25

critical perspectives on clandestine migration facilitationshelley,  louise.  2014.  human  smuggling  and  trafficking  into  europe: a  comparative 
perspective.  washington,  dc:  transatlantic  council  on  migration,  migration 
policy institute.

slack, jeremy. 2015. captive bodies: migrant kidnapping and deportation in mexico. 

area 48(3):271-77. https://doi.org/10.1111/area.12151. 

soo, charles. 2015. smuggled humans more profitable than drugs. trinidad & tobago 
guardian  online,  november  1.  http://www.guardian.co.tt/news/2015-10-31/
smuggled-humans-more-profitable-drugs.

spener, david. 2009. clandestine crossings: migrants and coyotes on the texas-mexico 

border. ithaca, ny: cornell university press.

stone-cadena,  victoria.  2016.  indigenous  ecuadorian  mobility  strategies  in  the 
clandestine migration journey. geopolitics 21(2): 345-65. https://doi.org/10.108
0/14650045.2016.1147028. 

tsay, ching-lung. 2004. marriage migration of women from china and southeast asia 
to taiwan. in (un)tying the knot: ideal and reality in asian marriage, edited by 
gavin jones and kamalini randas, 173-91. singapore: asian research institute, 
national university of singapore.

united  nations.  2000.  protocol  against  the  smuggling  of  migrants  by  land,  sea  and 
air,  supplementing  the  united  nations  convention  against  transnational 
organized  crime.  un  doc.  a/55/383.  https://www.unodc.org/documents/
southeastasiaandpacific/2011/04/som-indonesia/convention_smug_eng.pdf. 

van  liempt,  ilse.  2016.  a  critical  insight  into  europes  criminalisation  of  human 
smuggling.  european  policy  analysis  brief,  january.  stockholm:  swedish 
institute for european policy studies. 

varese,  federico.  2011.  mafias  on  the  move:  how  organized  crime  conquers  new 
territories.  princeton  and  oxford:  princeton  university  press.  https://doi.
org/10.1515/9781400836727. 

vogt, wendy. 2016. stuck in the middle with you: the intimate labours of mobility and 
smuggling along mexicos migrant route. geopolitics 21(2):366-86. https://doi.
org/10.1080/14650045.2015.1104666. 

warren,  robert,  and  donald  kerwin.  2015.  beyond  dapa  and  daca:  revisiting 
legislative reform in light of long-term trends in unauthorized immigration to 
the united states. journal on migration and human security 3(1):80-108. http://
dx.doi.org/10.14240/jmhs.v3i1.45. 

wolf, sonja. 2012. mara salvatrucha: the most dangerous street gang in the americas? 
latin american politics and society 54(1):65-99. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1548-
2456.2012.00143.x. 

26

journal on migration and human securityzaitch, damin. 2005. the ambiguity of violence, secrecy, and trust among colombian 
drug entrepreneurs. journal of drug issues 35(1):201-28. https://doi.org/10.117
7/002204260503500110. 

zhang,  sheldon  x.  2007.  chinese  human  smuggling  organizations:  families,  social 
networks and cultural imperatives. redwood city, ca: stanford university press.
. 2008. smuggling and human trafficking in human beings: all roads lead to 

america. santa barbara, ca: praeger. 

zhang, sheldon x., and ko-lin chin. 2002. the social organization of chinese human 
smuggling  a cross-national study. san diego, ca: san diego state university.
zhang,  sheldon  x.,  ko-lin  chin,  and  jody  miller.  2007.  womens  participation  in 
transnational  human  smuggling.  criminology  45(3):699-733.  https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1745-9125.2007.00085.x. 

27

critical perspectives on clandestine migration facilitation