book review 
waiting for jos: the minutemens 
pursuit of america
by  harel  shapira.  princeton,  nj:  princeton  university 
press, 2013. 208 pages.

maryann bylander
university of london

campaigns.  by 

waiting  for  jos  uncovers  the  practices 
and  motivations  of  those  who  form  the 
ranks  of  the  minutemen    a  u.s.  anti-
immigration  movement  that  has  garnered 
national  attention  over  the  past  decade 
for  its  voluntary  border  patrols  and  anti-
immigration 
liberal 
media  accounts,  the  minutemen  are  often 
depicted  as  xenophobic  vigilantes;  while 
in  the  eyes  of  the  conservative  media, 
they are heroic patriots. the minutemens 
website  boasts  their  mission  as  bringing 
awareness  to  the  illegal  alien  invasion, 
and  describes 
to  protect 
american  jobs,  fight  against  fraud  (they 
claim  that  millions  of  illegal  immigrants 
are getting a bigger tax refund than you), 
and  stop  unlawful  immigration.  whether 
readers  are  sympathetic  to  or  enraged  by 
the  minutemens  political  bravado,  they 
will be captivated by harel shapiras work 
helping us understand them.
in many ways, waiting for jos feels like an 
experiment in radical empathy. is it possible 
to truly understand the motivations of those 
who patrol the border, often armed, waiting 
to  encounter  would-be  immigrants?  the 
success of harel shapiras work is that by 

their  efforts 

inviting  us 

the  minutemen.  then, 

the end of the book we have (perhaps even 
unwittingly) done just that.
the  book  begins  by 
to 
dismantle  our  most  basic  assumptions 
about 
through 
rich  ethnographic  work,  it  rebuilds  our 
understanding  of  who  they  are,  and  why 
they do what they do which as the books 
title  points  out,  is  less  about  what  the 
public imagines (i.e. capture or otherwise 
encounter  immigrants)  and  more  about 
something  far  more  mundane.  one  of  the 
most central minuteman myths that shapira 
works  to  debunk  is  that  it  is  a  movement 
characterized  by  a  clear  set  of  right-wing 
beliefs  (anti-immigration,  racist,  fanatical, 
nationalist).  instead,  the  work  argues  that 
to understand the minutemen ideologically 
is to understand them poorly. throughout 
the  book  shapiras  informants  reveal  to 
readers  a  number  of  contradictions  and 
surprises.  though  critical  of  immigration, 
the minutemen are also critical of market 
logic, of the government, of globalization, 
and  of  the  loss  of  community  they  see  in 
contemporary american society. although 
they often express anger towards mexicans 
coming across the border, they also express 

58

 2013 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.

jmhs volume 1 number 1 (2013): 58-59

journal on migration and human security

yet  while  the  joy  of  the  book  is  in  its 
masterful storytelling and vivid description, 
it  also  makes  a  broader  methodological 
contribution.  in  many  ways  the  question 
at the heart of this book is less about the 
minutemen and more about how we as social 
researchers  understand  social  movements. 
through its focus on exploring the world 
of  the  minutemen  through  practice  and 
actions  (rather  than  ideology)  shapiras 
work calls for a rethinking of what it means 
to  understand  social  movements  and  the 
identities of those who participate in them.
although  the  book  will  be  of  specific 
interest 
in 
migration,  security,  social  movements, 
and  masculinities, 
invites  a  much 
broader readership. its narrative style and 
uncomplicated  prose  make  it  accessible 
to  a  wider  public.  this,  coupled  with  its 
accessible length and topical nature, makes 
it  an  ideal  text  for  teaching  at  any  level.  
undergraduates and graduate students alike 
will  find  this  a  readable,  refreshing,  and 
insightful work. 

those  with  an 

it 

to 

interest 

sympathy and respect for them. as shapira 
puts it, to the extent these folks have an 
ideology, it doesnt fall along party lines. 
rather,  the  author  suggests  that  at  least 
some  of  the  frustrations  and  problems 
minutemen feel they are responding to are 
quite similar to those identified by liberal 
democrats.
this  unsettling  recognition  then  begs  the 
question: if the minutemen arent patrolling 
the borders as a result of their ideologies, 
what are they there for? the answer turns 
out  to  be  belongingor  as  shapira  puts 
it,  a  chance  to  be  the  soldiers  they  used 
to  be,  the  men  they  wanted  to  be.  the 
minutemen,  he  argues,  are  engaged  less 
with  the  kinds  of  national  projects  they 
are  often  described  through,  and  more 
with  personal  projects  of  constructing 
notions of self, worth, place and meaning 
through practices of soldiering. thus what 
it  means  to  be  a  minuteman  has  little  to 
do  with  actual  encounters  with  border-
crossers  (which  are  intentionally  absent 
through most of the book). instead, being 
a minuteman happens through the acts of 
preparing  for  these  encountersthe  acts 
of waiting themselves, and the community 
minutemen participate in while doing so. 
on  the  whole,  the  work  is  a  balanced, 
engaging, and rich account of what draws 
minutemen  (a  group  which  does  include 
some  women)  to  the  border,  and  how 
they  make  meaning  out  of  their  time 
there.  moreover,  the  work  does  what 
good  ethnography  often  strives  for  but 
rarely  achieves:  it  puts  readers  onto  the 
border,  embeds  them  in  the  daily  lives 
of  a  community,  and  explores  both  seen 
and  unseen  with  a  keen  sociological 
imagination.

59

