responding to a refugee influx: 
lessons from lebanon

ninette kelley1

executive summary
between 2011 and 2015, lebanon received over one million syrian refugees. 
there is no country in the world that has taken in as many refugees in 
proportion to its size: by 2015, one in four of its residents was a refugee 
from syria. already beset, prior to the syrian crisis, by political divisions, 
insecure  borders,  severely  strained  infrastructure,  and  over-stretched 
public  services,  the  mass  influx  of  refugees  further  taxed  the  country. 
that  lebanon  withstood  what  is  often  characterized  as  an  existential 
threat  is  primarily  due  to  the  remarkable  resilience  of  the  lebanese 
people. it is also due to the unprecedented levels of humanitarian funding 
that  the  international  community  provided  to  support  refugees  and  the 
communities that hosted them. un, international, and national partners 
scaled up more than a hundred-fold to meet ever-burgeoning needs and 
creatively  endeavored  to  meet  challenges  on  the  ground.  and  while  the 
refugee  response  was  not  perfect,  and  funding  fell  well  below  needs, 
thousands of lives were saved, protection was extended, essential services 
were provided, and efforts were made to improve through education the 
future prospects of the close to half-a-million refugee children residing in 
lebanon. this paper examines what worked well and where the refugee 
response stumbled, focusing on areas where improved efforts in planning, 
delivery, coordination, innovation, funding, and partnerships can enhance 
future emergency responses.

i. introduction
over a three-and-a-half year period, beginning in the spring of 2011, lebanon, a small 
country of just 4,000 square miles, received over one million syrian refugees. the impact 
of both the syrian conflict and the refugee influx on lebanon has been profound. by 2015, 
one in four residents in lebanon was a refugee from syria, and lebanon hosted the second 
largest number of refugees in the world. in relative terms, the number of syrian refugees 

1   ninette kelley is director of the united nations high commissioner for refugees (unhcr) new york 
office. she served  as unhcrs representative to lebanon from 2010-2015. the views expressed in this 
paper are her own and do not necessarily reflect the positions of unhcr. this paper has benefitted from 
substantive comments from elizabeth ferris, betsy greve, rayan koteiche, lynne miller, and dominique 
tohme. 

 2017 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 5 number 1 (2017): 82-104lebanon has received would be the equivalent to the united states receiving approximately 
108 million refugees, or europe receiving approximately 169 million refugees.2
this paper examines the international and national response to what is considered one of 
the severest challenges faced by lebanon in all its complex history. it covers the four-year 
period from the spring of 2011 until february 2015, when border restrictions effectively 
stemmed  the  flow  of  refugees  to  the  country.  the  refugee  response  was  not  short  of 
missteps. but it was also full of great accomplishments: hundreds of thousands of refugees 
were received and protected, and basic needs were met, while efforts expanded to support 
local communities and national institutions in what was, and continues to be seen as, an 
existential challenge for lebanon. 
the war in syria continues: its impact now reverberates beyond the region while other 
new  and  ongoing  conflicts  force  millions  to  flee  or  remain  in  protracted  displacement. 
there is much to be learned from the response to the extraordinary challenges in lebanon. 
this paper examines the key lessons learned during the four years from 2011 to 2015. it 
focuses on areas that can improve the timeliness and effectiveness of refugee responses, 
including in regard to preparedness, scaling up, protecting refugees, coordinating efforts, 
mobilizing resources, expanding partnerships, engaging innovative practices, and ensuring 
humanitarian actions are fully accountable to those being helped. 

ii. context

a. political environment

at the start of the syrian crisis, lebanon had hosted palestinian refugees for over 60 years, 
estimated in 2010 to number 280,000 persons living in conditions considered among the 
most marginal in the middle east.3 a country that was officially at war with israel, that 
suffered from severe and often paralyzing internal political divisions and frequent security 
breaches, was on the cusp of becoming the largest recipient of refugees in the world, and 
arguably the most challenged by the influx. 
the experience of hosting palestinian refugees influenced to a great degree lebanons fears 
and responses to syrian refugees. hundreds of thousands of palestinians fled to lebanon in 
1948, and as their stay became prolonged, restrictions on their rights within lebanon were 
imposed, including being confined to camps that through time became over-crowded and 
under-serviced urbanized areas. ongoing marginalization contributed to palestinian support 
for the palestinian liberation organization (plo), which relocated to lebanon following 
its expulsion from jordan in 1970. plo involvement in lebanons brutal civil war (1975-
1990), which politically and economically devastated the country, fueled resentment within 
lebanon against palestinians and stigmatized the entire palestinian community. from the 
2   for the united states (us) and european union (eu) population data see respectively: http://www.
census.gov/popclock/; https://data.oecd.org/pop/population.htm.
3   united nations relief and work agency for palestine refugees in the near east (unrwa) 
registration numbers since 1948 show that as of 2011, 425,000 palestinians had registered in lebanon. a 
socioeconomic survey of palestinians in lebanon published at the end of 2010 estimated that due to mass 
migration, 260,000280,000 palestinian refugees resided in lebanon (chaaban et al. 2010).  

83

responding to a refugee influx: lessons from lebanonearly days of the syrian refugee influx, and based on the experience with palestinian refugees, 
lebanese authorities, with few exceptions, ruled out any possibility of establishing formal 
refugee camps4 for fear they would become permanent. similar reasons were given for the 
refusals to enable legal recognition of temporary residence and to facilitate registration of 
syrian refugee births. 
lebanons  long  and  close  history  with  syria  was  another  factor  that  influenced  the 
lebanese  governments  response  to  the  refugee  crisis.  during  the  ottoman  empire, 
lebanon was considered part of greater syria which geographically embraced lebanon, 
syria, jordan, and palestine. from 1976 to 2005, syria maintained a military presence and 
wielded strong political influence in lebanon. syrian ties inside lebanon therefore were 
and remain strong. throughout the syrian crisis, successive lebanese governments have 
adopted a policy of neutrality, officially known as disassociation, towards the situation 
inside syria. nonetheless, the two major political coalitions within lebanon were divided, 
with one supportive of the syrian opposition cause and the other backing the government 
of syria. public policy formation, including concerning refugees, often faced gridlock due 
to these divisions. 
between  2011  and  mid-2015,  lebanon  had  three  different  governments.  there  were 
also periods of caretaker governments when policy decision making reached a standstill. 
the government of prime minister tamam salam was formed in february 2014, and in 
may of that year, with the end of the presidential term of michel suleiman, the dominant 
political actors agreed that executive decision making would be reached by consensus. in 
many fundamental matters of basic governance, as well as issues pertaining to refugees, 
such consensus was hard to secure. political divisions further exacerbated gridlock at the 
executive and legislative levels by forestalling for over two years the election of a president 
and the reaching of an agreement on a roadmap for legislative elections. 
an additional challenge facing the government in the management of the refugee response 
was the lack of a specific legal framework or dedicated and comprehensive administrative 
system  for  the  management  of  refugee  affairs.  suggestions  to  create  an  administrative 
system were perceived as an attempt to perpetuate the presence of refugees in the country 
and therefore were not advanced. all humanitarian activities had to be coordinated across a 
number of ministries, each of which faced severe capacity issues in addressing their regular 
responsibilities, let alone the additional ones brought on by the refugee influx. 
finally, although the governance system is largely centralized, the absence of comprehensive 
policies to manage the refugee influx meant that decision making often devolved by default 
to  the  local  level.  lebanon,  which  can  comfortably  fit  within  the  state  of  connecticut, 
has  eight  governorates,  26  districts  (whose  leaders  are  centrally  appointed)  and  1,108 
municipalities  whose  leaders  are  elected  by  their  constituents.  municipal  authorities 
were the first responders and, despite significant administrative and financial constraints, 

4   from the outset, unhcr did not seek a camp option for refugees but did advocate for greater support 
to host communities so that refugees could live with as much dignity, independence, and normality as 
possible. when the numbers of arrivals exceeded available shelter supply, unhcr discussed with the 
authorities the possibility of establishing temporary shelter sites to relieve the situation of hundreds of 
thousands of refugees living in insecure informal sites. this idea was supported by some politicians as a 
humanitarian necessity but never received the consensus required. 

84

journal on migration and human securityhad to make decisions to deal with the massive influx of refugees in their communities. 
humanitarian efforts, therefore, had to navigate a complicated web of at times competing 
political agendas between the various levels of government. this was essential to ensure 
activities were appropriately authorized and to maintain the real and perceived impartiality 
of humanitarian action.

b. overview of the influx

the syrian refugee influx into lebanon initially was relatively modest. the first group 
of syrian refugees fled to northern lebanon in april 2011. they came from areas in and 
around tallalakh, homs, which had been the locus of confrontation between opposition 
protesters and government forces. several thousand syrians fled from this confrontation 
and traversed the few kilometers between talkhalekh and wadi khaled in north lebanon. 
most sought refuge with friends or family and many returned over the ensuing months to 
areas where tensions had subsided. at the end of the year there were only 5,000 syrian 
registered refugees in lebanon. 
in the next 12 months, however, the number of syrian refugees in lebanon increased to 
175,000 before further swelling to over 800,000 at the close of 2013. by this time they were 
spread throughout the entire country. for 21 months, between january 2013 until border 
restrictions began to be progressively imposed in september 2014, the united nations high 
commissioner for refugees (unhcr) was registering on average over 48,000 refugees 
per month.
by this time, the lebanese had gone beyond being uneasy about the influx, and across 
all political lines there was a consensus that the unabated arrival of refugees threatened 
the continued stability of the country. the incidents in aarsal, a small town perched on 
the rocky slopes of the anti-lebanon mountains bordering syria, marked a turning point. 
aarsal had been a port of safety for over 40,000 syrian refugees whose number by august 
2014 eclipsed that of the local population of 35,000 inhabitants. syrian opposition fighters 
moved freely in and out of aarsal and, in early august 2014, they engaged in a violent 
stand-off with the lebanese army that left 19 lebanese soldiers and 42 civilians dead, 
hundreds of soldiers and civilians wounded, and 29 policemen and soldiers captured by 
al-nusra and isis forces.
lebanon had reached a crossroads. at the time of the aarsal stand-off, the syrian refugee 
population exceeded one million. refugees were living in very dire circumstances. most 
rented overcrowded and very basic apartments or small plots of land to pitch a tent. others 
found  shelter  in  garages,  worksites,  and  unfinished  buildings. as  the  crisis  progressed, 
more  and  more  syrians  without  any  shelter  populated  the  streets  of  beirut,  including 
refugee children who, in states of abject poverty and neglect, could be found shining shoes, 
begging, and living under bridges. of the 400,000 school aged child refugees, only one 
quarter were enrolled in formal education and less than half had access to any education 
at all. 
other consequences of the syrian refugee influx also had become clear by the time of the 
battle at aarsal. primary health care clinics were overstretched, with lebanese experiencing 

85

responding to a refugee influx: lessons from lebanonlong waits for medical attention as more syrian refugees sought service. an already frail 
infrastructure (water, electricity, sanitation) was severely taxed by the additional demand. 
electricity  interruptions,  which  had  been  a  flash  point  of  protests  before  the  refugees 
arrived, were now more frequent. lack of appropriate waste disposal and waste and water 
treatment  endemic in lebanon  was more pungent and visible, with river beds near 
refugee  settlements  choked  with  garbage  and  land  around  collective  centers  similarly 
overflowing  with  refuse.  low-wage  lebanese  workers  saw  their  limited  employment 
opportunities shrink as syrian adult and child refugees were willing to work for even lower 
pay than they were. 
every town and village across the country had syrian refugees, and many villages contained 
more refugees than local residents. lebanese saw their small country being transformed 
and aarsal, it was widely felt, pointed to the risks the refugee influx posed. tightening 
the borders was well supported by all political parties, as were broader efforts to restrict 
refugee movement within lebanon, evict refugees from sensitive areas, and discourage 
prolonged stay. 

c. operational response

while  a  full  description  of  the  expansion  of  agency  responses  to  the  refugee  influx  in 
lebanon is beyond the scope of this paper, mentioning a few highlights is warranted. in 
virtually all areas of the agencies engagement, responses matured. reception moved from 
an ad hoc process to ensuring a border presence that provided information to prospective 
refugees on how to register with unhcr and referred those in urgent need to care providers. 
registration went from relying largely on mobile teams, to permanent registration centers 
in  four  locations  fitted  with  biometric  iris  scan  technology.  registration  centers  were 
equipped with places for children to play and for mothers to nurse their babies in privacy, 
as well as with immunization centers run by the ministry of health and the united nations 
international  childrens  fund  (unicef).  unhcr  and  the  ministry  of  social  affairs 
provided social and protection counseling at the registration centers. shelter interventions 
that initially focused on provision of in-kind assistance (materials, renovations of empty 
buildings for collective centers, and the provision of small housing units to landlords for 
installment on their land) gradually shifted to greater reliance on cash for rent or to buy 
shelter supplies. 
in-kind provision of food, initially by the government and later by the world food program 
(wfp), was eventually replaced by a wfp-run cash voucher system. initial reliance on 
trucking  of  water  to  refugees  in  informal  settlements  was  progressively  overtaken  by 
more sustainable options, such as investing in wells and reservoirs which also benefited 
local communities. ad-hoc assistance in meeting primary and secondary health care needs 
eventually  gave  way  to  investing  more  in  primary  health  care  centers,  and  a  new  and 
innovative means to engage a private sector health administrator to apply guidelines, monitor 
costs and efficiencies, and approve more costly secondary care. in regard to education, the 
goal was to ensure as many school-age refugees as possible were accommodated in the 
public system. the efforts gained significant traction when a consortium consisting of the 
ministry of education and higher education (mehe), un agencies, the world bank (wb) 
and donors formed a steering committee to assess the investments needed to ensure every 

86

journal on migration and human securityrefugee child was enrolled in school, to approve the budgets necessary, and to endorse and 
promote the collective appeals that followed. 
investment  in  community  support  projects  also  grew  exponentially  over  the  years.  for 
unhcr, this was important from various perspectives. in the first place, local communities 
were the first responders, opening up their homes and their properties to an ever-increasing 
number of refugees. investing in community projects, some related to the refugee presence 
and others to address systemic gaps in local services that predated the refugee crisis, was 
both an important measure of appreciation and helped to maintain a positive environment 
towards  refugees.  initial  investments  in  community  support  projects  by  unhcr  of 
$170,000 in 2012 increased to over $24 million by the end of 2014.5
combined  with  national  efforts,  international  contributions  had  an  important  impact. 
over a million refugees who fled into lebanon were received and registered. hundreds of 
thousands of refugees required and received food, shelter, and health assistance. tens of 
thousands were provided with specialized services to meet their specific needs. community 
centers grew to provide services to refugees and local residents, and projects to address 
systemic gaps in service delivery at the municipal level were expanded, while targeted 
support to ministries was increased. this was made possible by international humanitarian 
contributions that increased from less than $20 million in 2011 to $1 billion in 2015. at 
the same time, persistent budget shortfalls6 meant that food security remained precarious, 
shelter for tens of thousands of refugees was substandard, sanitation remained a constant 
challenge, and various negative impacts of the crisis  including illness and death from 
preventable causes  remained a constant scar on the refugee landscape. 
moreover,  refugees  faced  considerable  risks  to  their  security  which  humanitarian 
assistance and protection advocacy could not lessen. the lebanese authorities remained 
reluctant to relax the residency permit system, which remained too costly for most refugees 
to  afford. this  left  refugees  open  to  arrest  and  detention,  and  vulnerable  to  abuse  and 
extortion  from  unscrupulous  landlords.  similarly,  while  lebanon  has  always  relied  on 
syrian workers, progressive restrictions on the issuing of work permits left many refugees 
unable to secure work, while others who could find informal employment were exposed 
to serious exploitation by employers. the authorities also would not agree to facilitate the 
registration of refugee births, which were estimated to exceed 40,000 in 2015. lebanese 
law  mandates  the  registration  of  all  births  in  lebanon.  however,  refugees  had  great 
difficulty obtaining birth certificates for their newborns due to complicated administrative 
processes, burdensome fees, and arbitrary actions by local authorities. in the absence of 
a  birth  certificate  attesting  to  the  place  of  birth  and  nationality  of  the  parents,  refugee 
children in lebanon have no official legally recognized identity and therefore are at risk of 
being stateless. the consequences can be severe and include the inability to attend school, 
to receive medical care, to travel, to work legally, to marry, or to pass on ones nationality 
to ones children. 
5   notwithstanding the positive impact on communities, it is also the case that development support in areas 
such as water, waste management, electricity and health, and other service provision fell woefully short of 
what was required to address the impact of the refugee presence in lebanon. this is discussed more fully in 
section iii(d). 
6   the inter-agency refugee and resilience response plan for lebanon was consistently underfunded with 
shortfalls averaging 55 percent in 2015 and 2016. 

87

responding to a refugee influx: lessons from lebanoniii. lessons learned

a. preparedness

reflecting back on the early years of the syrian crisis, it is perhaps surprising to see the 
short term planning time frames used and what turned out to be erroneous contingency 
scenarios  engaged.  however,  buoyed  by  the  initial  phases  of  the arab  spring  that  had 
swept through tunisia, yemen, and egypt, there was a general view that the crisis inside 
syria would be short-lived. to be sure, there were those who predicted otherwise, but this 
was not the dominant view of the refugees or the lebanese, nor was it the dominant view 
of the humanitarian actors whose initial contingency planning underestimated by far the 
influx to come. humanitarian forecasting in the syrian situation seemed to be based more 
on previous experience elsewhere, than grounded in a firm understanding of the social, 
political, and economic history within syria. 
certainly throughout 2011 and the first half of 2012, the expectation was that displacement 
would be contained  through political concessions inside syria, the syrian government 
exerting control over areas of insurrection, or a stalemate in parts of syria. in lebanon, 
unhcr contingency planning in december 2011 estimated a refugee population of 7,000 
for  the  next  year,  accounting  for  future  arrivals.  nine  months  later,  when  the  refugee 
population reached 57,000 persons and was rising by 10,000 persons per month, the influx 
was projected to reach 300,000 by mid-2013. by june of 2013, however, over half a million 
syrian refugees were registered with unhcr, with more than 65,000 newly registered 
each month.
initially, projections were based on the expectation that  as in tunisia, egypt and libya 
 mass refugee flows would abate. as the conflict spread and the volume continued to 
grow, other factors limited projections. of these, the most significant factor was the sense 
that humanitarian planning based on projected political outcomes was fraught with risks. 
humanitarian action is grounded in four principles: humanity, neutrality, impartiality, and 
independence. these must be upheld at all times to ensure access to persons in need. a 
contingency plan based on projected outcomes, especially in highly politicized conflict 
situations, risks being seen as being partial. in the syria context, projecting mass outflows 
could  have  been  perceived  poorly  by  the  syrian  government,  hindered  humanitarian 
operations there, and caused panic in neighboring countries. 
it is also the case that once the influx reached a critical mass, agencies were stretched to 
meet daily and growing needs, and so there was simply no time to spare for projecting 
further increases and what that would require for agency scale-up. 
contingency planning that fell far short of what materialized was not unique to lebanon. 
in fact, by 2013, unhcr realized that a new planning vehicle was needed and developed a 
preparedness package for refugee emergencies, which is now complemented by an inter-
agency one (unhcr 2017; iasc n.d.). essentially, this methodology facilitates planning 
informed by assessing risks but not exclusively so: agencies can plan on what may be 
needed in various different escalating scenarios without formally assessing the likelihood 
of those scenarios occurring. in effect, this methodology removes the need to forecast a 

88

journal on migration and human securitypolitical outcome and allows for preparedness planning for a range of scenarios from the 
modest to most grave. it also assists in ensuring advance planning and readiness and avoids 
multiple revisions of contingency planning due to rapidly changing realities on the ground. 

b. agency scale-up 

enhanced preparedness planning may have helped to avert some of the difficulties agencies 
had in ensuring necessary staffing and program implementation capacity to meet growing 
demands. other challenges, however, would have remained regardless of the effectiveness 
of preparedness measures. 
for humanitarian actors, keeping up with the increase in scale of the influx was a major 
challenge, not the least for unhcr. the crisis was a slow burn, starting with a small 
influx in 2011, building slowly through 2012 and then expanding massively throughout 
2013 to 2015. the government could not cope and it fell upon unhcr along with un 
and ngo partners to receive and assist an ever burgeoning refugee population scattered 
across the hundreds of small communities in which they settled. in 2011, when the crisis 
began, unhcr had one small office in beirut, assisting 10,000 mostly iraqi refugees with 
an operating budget of just four million dollars. within four years, unhcr had six offices 
strategically located throughout the country, assisting over one million refugees with an 
operating budget of $322 million.7
managing such a rapid expansion required overcoming a variety of challenges. between 
2012  and  2014,  unhcr  struggled  to  find  physical  space  to  register  and  receive  all 
refugees. many landlords were hesitant to provide space or willing only to provide it for 
limited lengths of time. as a result, unhcr experienced 16 office set-ups and relocations 
throughout the country. the number and needs of refugees sky-rocketed, requiring constant 
expansion of programs and the staff to design and deliver needed assistance. unhcr went 
from having a few implementing partners to having over 40, and from having just 65 staff 
members initially to having 800 when the influx was at its peak. 
rapid emergency scale-up is part of unhcrs dna. it relies on the quick deployment 
of  experienced  professional  international  staff  in  critical  functional  areas  (protection, 
program, shelter, administration, finance, and human resources), bolstered by recruitment 
of national staff who often need rapid training to assume their functions. national staff 
typically outnumber international staff by a factor of 3:1. this formula usually ensures 
a  smooth  capacity  increase,  but  2013  proved  anything  but  usual.  the  magnitude  of 
the  syria  displacement,  coming  on  the  heels  of  the arab  spring  and  consequent  mass 
displacement in north africa, and occurring at the same time as emergencies in central 
african republic, south sudan, and the philippines, created challenges in identifying and 
deploying  experienced  staff  in  sufficient  numbers  and  with  the  functional  background 
needed to establish fully effective operational responses. 
unhcr reinforces its emergency staffing capacity in a staggered manner, starting with 
initial emergency deployments of a few months duration, drawing from expertise available 

7   unhcrs budget, although consistently less than projected needs, rose continually throughout the period 
and cumulatively amounted to $907 million for the 20122015 period. 

89

responding to a refugee influx: lessons from lebanonin the region and beyond. these emergency deployments, often managed through rosters 
and partner stand-by arrangements, are frequently engaged several times, as they were in 
lebanon, until a more stable staffing structure can be put in place.8 
other  emergency-oriented  international  partners  also  had  rapid  deployment  schemes. 
however, many beirut-based international agencies who wanted to contribute were unable 
to deliver programs at the desired level of speed or breadth because of insufficient capacity 
to expand quickly and effectively outside the capital as the situation demanded. this created 
challenges, for it meant that capacity on the ground was simply not able to match the need 
during the initial years. it also led to concerns that unhcr was too dominant, and engaged 
in areas where its operational partners were believed to have a comparative advantage, 
notwithstanding delays in being able to deliver on that advantage. 
moreover, despite unhcrs ability to deploy quickly, the refugee emergencies that swept 
the globe from 20122014 highlighted shortages of staff trained in the areas of administration, 
finance, project control, and supply. these competencies are all critical in managing the 
heavy  procurement,  disbursement,  project  monitoring,  audit,  and  strengthening  partner 
capacity necessary in an emergency response. unhcr has since engaged in recruitment 
exercises to attract new staff with the required competencies, and has expanded the number 
of national officers with these skill sets. these actions are appropriate. the lebanon crisis 
has  made  clear  the  need  for  extremely  forward-looking  human  resource  planning  by 
unhcr and all partners to ensure that staff with required skills will be available to meet 
emergency needs. 

c. coordination

in lebanon, as in 136 countries, around the world, un agencies ensure coordination of 
their activities as part of a un country team (unct). agencies jointly plan using a un 
development planning framework, and generally the plan becomes operational once endorsed 
by the government of the country concerned. the unct is led by a resident coordinator 
who also serves as head of the united nations development programme (undp).  within 
the unct, agencies lead in areas according to their mandate and expertise, with unhcr in 
the lead on refugee responses. the planning framework extends for five years. in lebanon, 
prior to the refugee influx, most un agencies were engaged in providing policy guidance 
to the office of the prime minster and to government ministries in one or more of the 
following five areas: governance, human rights, gender, socioeconomic development, and 
the environment. the united nations relief and works agency for palestine refugees in 
the near east (unrwa) ran the largest humanitarian program, while unhcr had a rather 
modest program to meet the needs of 10,000 mostly iraqi refugees. 
given its specialization, and pursuant to its mandate, unhcr, alongside the government, 
coordinated the work of un and partner agencies in regard to the refugee response. although 

8   a more stable second phase, beyond emergency deployments, was facilitated in lebanon by the initiation 
of an accelerated redeployment scheme, which enabled advertising, selection and redeployment of existing 
unhcr staff much more quickly than under normal procedures. this redeployment on a fast-track basis 
ensured a relatively efficient staffing scale up, although admittedly by placing a strain on other unhcr 
operations which saw their staff leave earlier than anticipated to meet emergency needs in lebanon and the 
region

90

journal on migration and human securitythe  governments  capacity  was  limited,  seeking  and  helping  to  capacitate  government 
leadership  early  on  was  essential  in  ensuring  necessary  approval  and  authority  for  the 
expansion necessary to meet the needs of refugees and the communities that were assisting 
them.9 it was the case, however, that regardless of this early engagement, coordination with 
the authorities remained a challenge given the many different government actors involved 
and the absence of detailed policy guidance being issued at the central level. 
no less challenging was coordination among un and partner agencies. here the problems 
were  threefold:  initial  lack  of  capacity,  insufficient  local  focus,  and  overlapping  and 
duplicative un processes. 
firstly,  agencies  were  initially  short  of  capacity  in  the  form  of  staff  and  information 
management tools to meet growing demands. the scale-up of appropriate staff remedied 
the former while the introduction of new automated tools greatly enhanced the latter. but 
these remedies should ideally have come far earlier in the crisis. 
related to this challenge was the fact that un and international partner agencies had a 
relatively heavy presence in beirut and readily attended coordination meetings there but 
had little presence in the field areas where the majority of refugees and communities in 
which they lived needed support. as a consequence, there were insufficient links between 
policy decisions taken in the inter-agency meetings in beirut, and implementation taking 
place in the field. similarly, policy decisions were limited by an incomplete understanding 
of the opportunities and constraints faced by humanitarians in the field, which varied in 
each location. this heavy beirut-based focus shifted gradually with a more proportionate 
engagement in the field as unhcr and its implementing and operational partners delegated 
more program management and decision making to field offices in late 2013 and 2014. 
again, this decentralization should have come sooner. 
secondly, since most agency activities had been traditionally beirut-based, they did not 
have a significant understanding of the local governance structures at an early stage. one 
clear  lesson  from  lebanon,  applicable  across  many  humanitarian  contexts,  is  that  it  is 
not  sufficient  to  coordinate  only  with  central  authorities.  engaging  local  authorities  is 
also critical and investment in both must occur at the outset. this is also an area where 
good preparedness planning prior to an emergency is essential. in the lebanon situation, 
un and partner agencies did not have a detailed enough view or understanding of the 
governance structure in lebanon from the central to the local level nor deep connections 
to local authorities. undp had invested heavily in strengthening capacities of both central 
and local authorities but this experience was not widely shared. a mapping of government 
actors at various levels, accompanied by clear analysis of their respective accountabilities 
and authorities, would have helped to produce stronger area-based coordination earlier in 
the crisis, and would have improved outcomes for both refugees and impacted communities. 
a third constraint to effective inter-agency coordination was the duplicative coordination 
mechanisms of the united nations. consistent with its relatively rapid initial scale-up, 

9   for example, initially registration was done jointly with the government, as was food distribution, until 
the number of refugees eclipsed the ability of the government to continue. but the early engagement was 
critical, and helped to counter later allegations that unhcr had registered and assisted refugees without 
government approval. 

91

responding to a refugee influx: lessons from lebanonunhcr assumed leadership positions not just for the overall refugee response but also 
in sectors where other agencies felt they had a comparative advantage. unhcr took this 
approach because many such agencies initially faced substantial constraints in deployments 
and  operational  delivery. a  system  of  co-leadership  was  undertaken  from  the  outset  in 
sectors such as social cohesion and livelihoods, education, water, sanitation, and health. 
while  this  made  sense  initially,  unhcr  could  have  more  readily  relinquished  its  co-
leadership of these sectors as soon as its operational partners were able to take them on, 
and focused instead on areas in which unhcrs capacity and leadership are recognized: 
protection,  shelter,  and  overall  coordination  of  the  refugee  response.  this  would  have 
helped to ease the tension and competition between agencies which characterized the early 
years of the response. 
an additional complicating factor in the lebanon situation was an overlap and duplication 
brought about by the creation of a humanitarian country team (hct) that worked in parallel 
to the refugee coordination structure and the unct. 
in june 2012, when the number of syrian refugees in lebanon was just 8,300 persons, the 
un emergency relief coordinator appointed a humanitarian coordinator (hc) for lebanon. 
while this appointment was not intended to organize a refugee response, the fact was that 
the refugee influx was the dominant humanitarian concern in the country. the designation 
of a humanitarian coordinator, who was also the resident coordinator (rc) serving in a dual 
capacity, was followed by the creation of a hct consisting of un agencies, the international 
organization for migration, ngo representatives, and members of the international red 
cross and red crescent societies. donor representation was later added. 
as the situation became more complex inside lebanon, the need for a more robust response 
to strengthen lebanese institutions and support communities affected by the syrian crisis 
became more readily recognized. this was a pivotal moment. the work could have been 
pursued as part of the unct. relevant agencies of the un development system, which 
provides the policy advice to uncts, should have worked to reinforce the capacity of the 
unct to reorient its work accordingly and to engage ngos and donors in the process. 
instead, the rc was designated as hc with a mandate to initiate a parallel coordination 
structure.
there were now three coordination mechanisms operating in tandem with the government: 
the refugee response led by unhcr; the humanitarian response led by the humanitarian 
coordinator; and the longer term development response within the unct.  for the former, 
while policy was set in beirut, the bulk of the efforts  assessments, implementation, 
monitoring, and evaluation  were done in the field. in contrast, both unct and hct 
meetings generally were information sharing, with a heavy focus on the refugee response. 
the cost of the additional hct process, in terms of time, and also arguably in diminished 
relevance of the unct, was notable. throughout 2014 and 2015 there were separate and 
often bi-weekly meetings of the hct and unct, with each meeting 1.5 to 2.5 hours in 
duration. both meetings occurred in beirut and often covered the same agenda items. the 
meetings regularly occurred a few days apart and were attended by over 24 agencies. the 
most significant difference between the two meetings was that donors and ngo partners 
attended the hct. 

92

journal on migration and human securityin the end, there was a consolidated plan, with unhcr leading on the refugee response 
component and undp leading on the resilience and stabilization side. by this time, the 
growth of undps capacity allowed it to embrace its role. however, rather than starting 
with this approach from the outset, as part of a capacitated unct, an additional layer 
was added which depleted the already stretched time and resources of humanitarian and 
development partners. 
the  value  of  an  hct  is  indisputable  in  humanitarian  emergencies,  particularly  when 
there is widespread internal displacement, which was the reason for their creation. ideally, 
however, even in such situations, the life of the hct should be limited and investments made 
to capacitate the existing unct and bring in additional partners from donor, ngo, and 
private sector spheres as necessary, to holistically support a country with its humanitarian 
and  development  challenges.  this  would  prevent  duplication  and  reflect  the  growing 
consensus that humanitarian and development actions should be linked from the outset 
of an emergency. coordination should be streamlined and the unct held accountable for 
delivering on its mandate, as calls for empowered rc and unct leadership increasingly 
demand. 

d. development action

while there is no doubt that the creation of the hct added an additional layer of coordination, 
it is also the case that the unct failed to flexibly reorient itself to the changing situation 
in lebanon. within the unct, agency joint planning  often referred to as joined up 
planning  was based on desired development outcomes conceived and approved well 
before the syrian crisis. many agencies were pursing objectives with various ministries that 
had little or nothing to do with humanitarian relief to refugees. the concern was frequently 
expressed that the humanitarian response not overshadow or distract from the important 
development priorities in which agencies were already engaged. even in 2013, when it 
became clear that the crisis in syria was likely to be protracted, it was difficult to reorient 
development priorities and actions to the new reality in lebanon. 
this was a result of many factors. in addition to initial erroneous forecasting of the length of 
the conflict in syria, the development actors faced difficulties in readjusting programs, most 
of which were the product of detailed design and long negotiation to secure government 
approval. moreover, as readily as undp saw the need to invest in providing support to 
local communities assisting refugees, it had an extremely small funding envelop to draw 
upon. additionally,  because  lebanon  is  a  middle-income  country,  direct  support  to  its 
institutions beyond technical and policy advice was often not accounted for in agency or 
donor program designs. coupled with these challenges was a historically poor record of 
accounting by government agencies for support such as was provided for the post-2006 
israeli-lebanese conflict reconstruction efforts. 
as a consequence of these factors, the unct missed opportunities to unify and reorient 
un  agency  work  early  on  towards  a  resilience  agenda  (for  support  to  institutions  and 
host  communities  impacted  by  the  syrian  crisis).  interventions  to  help  institutions  and 
communities impacted by the refugee influx were initially introduced by unhcr in inter-

93

responding to a refugee influx: lessons from lebanonagency funding appeals for the syria situation in 2014.10 subsequently, unhcr, with the 
support of several partners, implemented over 270 community support projects throughout 
the country in areas where poverty levels, refugee numbers, and tensions were high. projects 
included new wells; water, sanitation and waste management facilities; community centers; 
improved medical facilities; youth education and sport activities; rehabilitation works; and 
livelihood projects.11 yet as important as these projects were, they alone could not address 
the serious impact of the syrian crisis on lebanon, including the refugee influx, which was 
far beyond humanitarian funding to address. 
the  extent of  that impact was  dramatically illustrated by  the  publication in  september 
2013 of the economic and social impact assessment (esia) of the syrian conflict on 
lebanon.12 the assessment concluded that the syrian crisis had a significant economic 
impact on lebanon. trade, tourism, consumer confidence, and investment all had fallen, 
contributing to a loss of government public revenue of $1.5 billion. moreover, increased 
numbers  of  refugees  had  taken  a  toll  on  public  services  (health  and  education)  and 
infrastructure (electricity, water, sanitation, and transportation), such that lebanon would 
need approximately $2.5 billion to restore public services and infrastructure to pre-conflict 
levels. the report further estimated that an additional 170,000 lebanese would be pushed 
into poverty. 
several months later the world bank established a trust fund to help the lebanese government 
deal with the fiscal impact of the syrian crisis. the objective was to ensure a timely and 
reliable flow of international grants to finance projects that would have immediate impacts 
on lebanese communities affected by the influx of syrian refugees. unfortunately, the trust 
fund failed to meet expectations in the ensuing years due to a lack of political consensus 
to ensure that necessary mechanisms were in place and that disbursements were made as 
planned. 
another relatively early partner on the development side was the european union (eu). the 
eu responded quickly to unhcrs concerns that hosting communities needed assistance 
to cope with the increase in arrivals of refugees. through various funding sources, the eu 
financed a range of projects designed at the municipal level, including efforts to improve 
waste collection, water distribution, community services, and the delivery of public health. 
these efforts went a long way in assisting communities and lessening prospective tensions 
between refugees and the lebanese. eu funding was also directed towards strengthening 
the capacities of the ministry of health and the ministry of education to improve service 
delivery and to do so in a manner that included refugees in the provision of services. 
10   during 2014 and subsequently, there were six refugee response plans, i.e., regional strategy 
documents, with specific country chapters, designed to present an inter-agency assessment of humanitarian 
needs resulting from the crisis in syria, and aiming to ensure a coherent response to those needs.
11   funding was provided by a variety of donors including the european union, france, germany, italy, 
kuwait, mexico, the russian federation, the said and asfari foundations, saudi arabia, the swiss agency 
for development and cooperation and the united states (unhcr 2014). 
12   the 2013 assessment was led by the world bank (wb) in collaboration with a number of un agencies 
(notably undp, unicef and unhcr), the european union, and the international monetary fund 
(imf). its background can be found in 2012 discussions held between unhcr and the wb regarding how 
unhcrs data could be used together with wb expertise to analyze the economic impact of the syrian 
crisis, including the impact of the refugee influx on lebanon and the institutional support that would be 
needed.

94

journal on migration and human securitythese efforts by the eu, and others, started to become more entrenched in the refugee 
response from late 2014 onwards. unlike the community support projects, these investments 
were of a larger scale and were intended to be multi-year. the benefits were particularly 
visible in the area of education: the minister of education and higher education (mehe), 
with the support of several donor states, unicef, the world bank, unhcr, and other 
specialized agencies, made a concerted push to strengthen the capacity of the public school 
system. the  ambition  was  twofold:  to  improve  the  quality  of  public  education,  and  to 
expand capacity to ensure the inclusion of refugee children. the former was important since 
weaknesses in the public system had resulted in 75 percent of lebanese children attending 
private institutions and rendering the public system populated largely by poorer children 
whose need for a good education was every bit as essential. the push to achieve these 
aims was concentrated in a new three-year program, reaching all children with education 
(race) that was initiated in 2014 (mehe 2014). race encompassed a combination of 
efforts including physical rehabilitation of schools, teacher training, accelerated learning 
programs, and technical support to the ministry. 
this broad-based partnership, which engaged humanitarian and development actors in an 
effort both to expand education to children and improve the outcomes for lebanon, has 
had significant impact. although it is too early to know whether the efforts will translate 
over time into longer school retention rates, and more primary and secondary graduates 
within  refugee  and  lebanese  communities,  the  initial  results  were  positive.  lebanon 
went from accommodating just 62,664 refugee children in the public system in 2013, to 
accommodating over 100,000 in 2015 with plans for an additional 100,000 the following 
year. 
the refugee influx into lebanon, particularly from 2013 onwards, focused international 
attention on lebanon and the level of financial engagement by donors was much larger than 
existed before the crisis. while the mass arrival of refugees strained the delivery of public 
services, the relatively early linkages of humanitarian and development planning in the 
education sector helped to ensure improved outcomes for both refugees and lebanese. it 
is a useful example of what is increasingly being seen as the advantages of comprehensive 
joined  up  humanitarian  and  development  planning,  which  should  become  less  of  an 
exception and more of a rule in future responses. 
by 2015, this approach was fully reflected in funding appeals which were based on meeting 
the needs of refugees as well as providing more robust support for lebanese institutions.13 
the lesson  learned from  lebanon is  that this  joined-up  humanitarian and  development 
programming should be embarked upon early in the crisis, and extend beyond education to 
delivery of other critical services.

e. funding 

as funding depends on voluntary contributions, and was neither predictable nor (but for a 
few exceptions) multi-year, stable programming was not possible. in 2013 alone, unhcr 
in lebanon experienced nine budget increases. 
13   the regional refugee and resilience response plan launched in that year, which included lebanon 
and other hosting countries in the region, appealed for $4.3 billion to respond to refugee needs in the 
region, and $1.75 billion for lebanon alone. 

95

responding to a refugee influx: lessons from lebanonthe  practical  constraints  of  such  a  situation  cannot  be  underestimated.  unhcr  and 
partners could not be sure whether they would have the funds needed to meet very basic 
shelter, protection, health, and food needs throughout the year. limited funds secured at 
the beginning of the year had to be planned to meet basic needs for a limited number of 
months, in the uncertain hope that more funding would be forthcoming, or strictly rationed 
from the beginning, in the hope of maintaining some thin coverage until the end of the year. 
the consequences were often brutal. in 2013, for example, agencies did not secure funding 
by mid-year to purchase materials needed to procure shelters for the winter months, which 
would begin when temperatures started to plummet at the end of september. when funding 
arrived in the last quarter, it was too late to secure all the materials necessary and distribute 
them to the thousands of refugees trapped by snow and freezing rain. 
as the operation matured, and as the crisis in lebanon garnered more international coverage, 
funding became less of a challenge insofar as agencies could plan with more certainty at 
the beginning of the year that the level of pledges made (which were never in excess of 
50 percent of what was needed) would be followed by disbursements throughout the year. 
this meant that unhcr and partners could plan with a higher level of certainty, although 
always with significantly less funding than what the situation demanded. 
for their part, many donors were pledging amounts far above previous levels and without 
such support there would have been considerable loss of refugee life in lebanon and greater 
instability throughout the country. at the same time, the tight earmarking of contributions 
meant that agencies had little flexibility to move funds from areas that were relatively well 
resourced to life saving interventions that were less well funded. relatively tight earmarking 
of contributions also led to multiple and complicated reporting on funds received: within 
a donor country, different sources of funds had different reporting requirements, and no 
donor country had the same requirements as another. 
while donors are generally sympathetic to the constraints earmarking imposes on agencies, 
they nonetheless continue to favor earmarking because contributions to a specific cause, 
such  as  education,  allow  them  to  show  constituents  concrete  benefits  arising  from  the 
funding, in exactly the area in which improvement was sought. earmarking also assures 
them that their priorities will be met and not displaced by priorities that the recipient agency 
may favor. it is perhaps not surprising, therefore, that earmarked contributions for unhcr 
in lebanon from 2013 to 2015 grew from 52 to 62 percent of total contributions received. 
meanwhile, the number of separate donor reports increased during that same period from 
21 to 61. 
as the number and size of donor contributions grew, naturally so too did donor interest 
in  visiting  refugees  and  seeing  firsthand  the  conditions  in  which  refugees  lived,  the 
consequences of the influx on lebanon and the impact of their own contributions. the 
number of days each year that unhcr hosted such donor missions, complete with briefings 
and site visits, increased from 50 in 2013 to 150 in 2015. 
another  challenge  faced  in  lebanon,  which  is  also  present  in  other  operations,  is  that 
donors often had bilateral agreements with many of the partners that unhcr and other 
un agencies used to implement their programs. there was little coordinated assessment 
of partner activity, either as between un agencies, between un agencies and donors, or 

96

journal on migration and human securitybetween donors themselves. this was unfortunate for each donor and/or agency engaging 
the same partner in a particular sector that had a separate review, monitoring, assessment, 
reporting, and auditing mechanism. this was certainly cumbersome for the partners and 
did not advance improved programming overall. 
the limitations imposed by the lack of significant multi-year funding for humanitarian 
action  and  the  constraints  that  are  consequent  upon  heavily  earmarked  funding  were 
recently addressed as part of the discussion of the grand bargain at the world humanitarian 
summit (un secretary-general 2016).14 the goal should be to limit earmarking, establish 
adequate  multi-year  funding  whenever  possible,  and  harmonize  reporting  requirements 
and partner assessments between donors. 

f. innovation

increasingly donors call for, and humanitarian agencies pledge, to deliver programs more 
efficiently,  including  through  innovative  means.  indeed,  innovative  means  of  service 
delivery are coming on stream at an accelerated pace. what is very much needed is better 
linking of these initiatives to benefit more operations. 
the response to the refugee influx in lebanon brought together an extremely diverse array 
of  humanitarian  actors  across  agencies,  which  met  regularly,  formally  and  informally 
to enhance information and data analysis across all sectors. among them was a core of 
extremely  savvy  and  technologically  adept  national  and  international  colleagues  who, 
faced with constraints in program design and delivery, set about creatively to overcome 
them.  sometimes  these  efforts  drew  from  best  practices  elsewhere,  which  were  often 
subsequently enhanced; at other times, new means were adopted.

1. registration using biometrics

the move to biometric registration in lebanon was one of the most significant enhancements 
to  registration,  needs  identification,  coordination,  and  refugee  protection.  adapting 
the technology piloted in jordan, unhcr introduced biometric iris scanning as part of 
registration processes in late 2013. that move greatly sped up the process of registration 
and permitted daily and disaggregated information on arrivals and trends throughout the 
country. it also helped to ensure the integrity not only of unhcrs registration data but 
also of the systems that depended on reliable registration data, including for assistance 
and resettlement. as the data was secure and linked eventually to unhcr offices in the 
region, it facilitated early detection of multiple claims.  the registration process was further 
enhanced by the development of an electronic syrian id card reader, which eliminated 
the risk of human error in transcribing a name from the id card to the registration data 
base. the card reader became part of a package of efforts to strengthen the capacity of the 
lebanese government that until then relied largely on manual data entry. 

14   the grand bargain refers to a package of reforms to humanitarian funding launched at the world 
humanitarian summit. donors and aid financing agreed to 51 commitments to make emergency aid finance 
more efficient and effective in order to better serve people in need (the grand bargain 2016). 

97

responding to a refugee influx: lessons from lebanon2. refugee assistance information system

registration data was linked to a refugee assistance and information database developed 
by unhcr and known as the refugee assistance information system (rais). rais is 
an assistance tracking and referrals database. it allows unhcr and its partners to share 
information on who has been assisted and how, and what further follow-up is needed. the 
system is synchronized daily with the registration system. refugees consent to having their 
data shared with only those partners who sign a data sharing agreement with unhcr and 
meet data security protocols. the system dramatically reduces the chance of duplication of 
assessments, reduces the risks of overlap in partner activities, and improves the delivery of 
services to refugees by facilitating the ability of partners to monitor whether assistance has 
been provided to persons in need of it and whether referrals to appropriate services have 
been made.
beyond the tracking of assistance provided to individual refugees and households, rais 
is also used in post-distribution monitoring to assess the status and changes in expenditure 
patterns and coping strategies of refugees. this is done through household visits using a 
rais mobile data collection solution. the mobile data solution was also applied to taking 
case  histories  and  referral  of  persons  to  specific  services,  and  for  ongoing  monitoring 
including as a means to track school enrollment. in large operations like the lebanese 
one, rais also permits humanitarian actors to respond to inquiries from refugees, and 
to provide them with up to date information on whether they have been determined to be 
eligible for assistance and whether they have been registered with unhcr.

3. electronic reporting

as the number of partners and donors grew, consistent reporting became a serious issue. 
multiple sectors and agencies were using different means and different time periods to 
report on their assessments and their activities. this was creating confusion and inhibiting 
a clearer picture of needs, interventions, and gaps. to address this problem, an open source 
tool called activity info, first piloted by unicef and the office for the coordination of 
humanitarian affairs (ocha) in the democratic republic of the congo, was adapted to 
the lebanon context. all partners were trained in its use. partner reports were henceforth 
streamlined  into  a  single  electronic  database,  using  harmonized  data  sets  and  with 
predictable  frequency.  the  tool  significantly  enhanced  coordination  by  permitting  the 
tracking of agencies activities throughout the country and the identification of areas and 
needs that had yet to be met. activity info is one of the most significant data management 
tools and one that should be employed in other emergency and large operation settings. 

4. data collection and consolidation

in the early years of the emergency, most field data was collected by hand, using paper, 
clipboards, and excel spreadsheets. data clerks then had to be employed to encode the 
data  into  databases,  so  that  the  data  could  be  analyzed. within  a  couple  of  years,  this 
methodology gave way to mobile data collection using open source software. the data 
collected was automatically linked to the relevant sector-based database. this enhanced 
efficiency and improved reliability and analysis. 

98

journal on migration and human securitymoreover, just as activity info harmonized and facilitated agency reporting and coordination, 
so too did the application of spongebase, developed for the lebanon context by unhcr 
and  unicef.  spongebase  provides  a  means  to  automatically  collate  information  from 
different data sources and aggregate them onto a web-based map. prior to its use, agencies 
received  only  a  partial  view  of  data,  given  that  multiple  databases  and  data  sets  were 
being used and were not pulled together and linked to geographic areas so as to provide a 
consolidated overview. 
significant time and effort can be saved, coordination enhanced, and analysis improved 
with the use of such data management and analysis tools early in an emergency. 

5. cash-based programming

while cash-based programming is often cited as an example of innovative programming, 
the use of cash to meet needs is neither particularly new nor innovative. its expanded use in 
addressing refugee needs, however, is relatively recent. the advantages of properly designed 
and  monitored  cash-based  programming  include:  cost  effectiveness;  the  empowerment 
of recipients by enabling them to determine what to prioritize given their specific needs; 
the provision of a more dignified means of receiving help compared to receiving in-kind 
assistance; benefits to local markets and economies; and a reduction in fraud. 
the  use  of  cash  in  lebanon  to  provide  assistance  for  refugees  had  always  been  rather 
modest. in the early days of the syrian crisis, the wfp introduced a food voucher system, 
but  it  was  not  until  much  later  in  the  crisis  that  some  agencies  tested  the  use  of  cash 
cards as an alternative means of delivering assistance. cash-based programming through 
multi-purpose cash cards had already been successfully implemented in jordan, but its 
introduction in lebanon met with initial resistance from the government on the grounds that 
poor lebanese would resent cash being provided to refugees. this reticence was overcome 
in  large  part  due  to  the  willingness  to  link  cash-based  programming  to  improvements 
to  lebanons  national  poverty targeting  program  (nptp).  specifically,  with  technical 
guidance from the world bank, an emergency project was launched to expand and improve 
the social assistance package of the nptp, including to those affected by the syrian crisis 
(world bank 2014).15
the greater reliance on cash-based programming through the use of multi-purpose cash 
cards in lebanon proved to be a boon and would have helped even more if it had been 
initiated earlier. for example, investment in communal shelters made sense initially when 
refugee numbers were small and seemingly temporary. but their use proved difficult as 
problems were encountered in ensuring proper site management by partners and refugees 
and  in  maintaining  good  relations  with  surrounding  communities.  such  investment 
ultimately proved unsustainable given the relatively high cost of maintaining communal 
shelters amidst burgeoning shelter needs which could not be met by the extremely limited 
number  of  sites  available  for  collective  accommodation. an  early  recourse  to  cash  for 
rent, in hindsight, would have been a better option. in addition, the provision of winter 
assistance initially in kind, and later through partial reliance on fuel vouchers, turned out 
to be very problematic as the numbers grew. the use of fuel vouchers left agencies open to 
15     an additional financing grant was sought in june 2016 from the world bank. 

99

responding to a refugee influx: lessons from lebanonintimidation by petrol suppliers who wanted to be included in the scheme but did not meet 
the selection criteria. moreover, vouchers also left refugees open to intimidation by gangs 
who insisted that they sell the vouchers for less than the face value. finally, some types of 
in-kind shelter support, such as weatherproofing materials, were excessively costly in terms 
of  warehousing  and  transportation  expenses. winter  support  was  more  sustainable  and 
better able to meet needs when in-kind support was selectively provided  for example, 
for high efficiency and safe heaters of good quality that were obtained through established 
and competitive suppliers. 
reaching more harmonized approaches by wfp, unhcr, and several ngos was complex 
given that initially they used different methodologies to determine needs, and provided 
cash for different purposes (food, shelter, multi-use) and in different formats (vouchers, 
cash  cards).  moreover,  the  move  to  cash  cards  entailed  complicated  negotiations  with 
banks, technological interfaces to link registration and eligibility data with cash delivery, 
monitoring mechanisms and most importantly, a common means for determining  across 
agencies and amongst donors  the criteria to determine who was entitled to such support 
and at what level. 
through prolonged and exacting negotiations, a common methodology was agreed upon to 
address these issues. in the first instance, a statistical model was applied to the information 
gathered during registration in order to predict the needs of a household. this was followed 
with information gathered by sectoral specialists through their visits, which could indicate 
higher or lower levels of vulnerability upon which eligibility would be adjusted. in short, 
collective action was brought to bear on a situation-specific challenge, one which unhcr, 
wfp, unicef and partners are examining further as they explore employing joined and 
single-cash delivery systems elsewhere. 

g. accountability

humanitarians must remain accountable to those they seek to assist. it is not sufficient 
solely to assess needs and deliver assistance. assistance must be informed by what refugees 
feel they need and can use, and their feedback on the utility of humanitarian efforts must 
be communicated to improve responses. while achieving such accountability is important 
in operations of all sizes, it is especially challenging in large operations like lebanon, with 
sizable and dispersed beneficiary populations.
for many years, unhcr has been using participatory assessments, which include holding 
separate discussions with women, men, girls, and boys in order to gather accurate information 
on the specific problems they face and also to hear their proposed solutions. participatory 
assessments help to ensure that humanitarian action reflects refugees priorities and that 
refugees are able to contribute to the design, modification, and implementation of efforts. 
print  and  electronic  media  (flyers,  posters,  signs,  and  videos)  are  standard  forms  of 
communication at registration centers, community centers, health clinics, and elsewhere 
to deliver important information regarding protection, service availability, public health, 
fraud prevention, and response messages. unhcr has also developed specific websites 
for refugees that convey all manner of information needed to address refugee concerns 

100

journal on migration and human securityand provide advice regarding available services. refugees can rate the usefulness of the 
information provided and suggest means to improve it. in addition, in lebanon, radios 
were distributed by the united nations educational, scientific and cultural organization 
(unesco) and unhcr, and a weekly radio program for refugees was used to supplement 
other information-sharing efforts. 
relying on refugees to assist in program delivery was also hugely valuable in ensuring 
that the humanitarian response was optimally directed at real needs. in lebanon, where 
refugees were spread across 1,700 locations, it was difficult to ensure timely access to all 
locations. the refugee outreach program was designed to engage up to 1,000 refugees to 
provide specialized information to refugee communities in the areas of health, education, 
law, and child protection. refugees engaged in these efforts often have pre-existing training 
in  specialized  areas,  but  also  receive  specialized  support.  in  lebanon,  they  received 
induction training on the situation in the country, the humanitarian response, unhcrs 
code of conduct, and protection and humanitarian principles. they circulated regularly in 
their communities, providing advice and referring refugees in need to specialized services. 
they met weekly with unhcr and partner agencies, and received updates on the latest 
information and stipends for their services. 
reliance  on  refugees  for  outreach  greatly  improved  communication  with  refugee 
communities, and led to more persons at risk coming forward to seek advice and help. it 
also helped to ensure that agencies had up-to-date information about refugees concerns, 
which was especially vital in communities that, due to security threats, were out of bounds 
for most humanitarian workers. moreover, the program benefits the refugees it engages, 
who appreciate the evident impact their involvement has and the useful employment of 
their time and talents. 
a relatively simple but useful tool that was developed in the lebanon operation was a 
two-way instant messaging system to advise refugees on their eligibility for assistance. 
refugees in lebanon had access to mobile phones and could opt to receive messages from 
unhcr  on  their  phones.  this  was  especially  useful  in  communicating  time-sensitive 
information regarding changes in government policy and other important information. a 
system was developed to enable refugees to contact unhcr by instant message regarding 
their eligibility for assistance and to receive an immediate automated response. 
the recognition over time of the need for multiple means to ensure open and informed 
communication lines with refugees was an important development in the lebanon refugee 
response. it is another lesson learned: to maximize the breadth of communication lines, 
complementary tools should be launched at the outset and not rolled out consecutively. 

h. local partnerships

lebanon  had  no  shortage  of  national  ngos  or  civil  society  groups  responding  to  the 
refugee crisis. there were over 8,000 such groups registered with the authorities, with 
approximately  1,000  registered  groups  actively  involved  in  providing  assistance  to 
refugees (brd 2015). a core set of local ngos had long worked as implementing partners 
for unhcr and other agencies in responding to the needs of iraqi refugees prior to the 

101

responding to a refugee influx: lessons from lebanonsyrian crisis. like everyone else, however, national ngos were challenged by the scale 
of the syrian refugee influx and it was extremely difficult for them to scale up quickly and 
ensure that the financial and accountability controls necessary for expanded partnerships 
with un agencies were in place. moreover, for some, complying with these requirements 
proved to be a problem that could not be easily remedied, as the requirements (demanded 
by international accounting practices and auditing regulations) were quite burdensome. 
the result was that international ngos dominated the scene for the initial years. when the 
situation escalated so quickly, there was insufficient time to invest sufficiently in the needed 
capacity building of national partners. this started to change when the refugee inflows 
subsided. in 2015, unhcr introduced a system of area mentoring, whereby experienced 
international implementing partners, as part of their agreements with unhcr, worked 
alongside national ngos under what were known colloquially as umbrella agreements. 
the idea was that over time the national ngos would replace the international ngos in 
implementation, once the formers implementation and financial control accountabilities 
were strengthened. 
the lesson learned, which also saw expression in the commitments arising from the world 
humanitarian  summit  of  may  2016,  is  for  greater  reliance  on  national  partners.  this 
means investing in capacity building prior to crisis, including through the use of umbrella 
agreements and evaluating their effectiveness over time. 
it is important to note, however, that the lebanon experience pointed to instances where 
direct contracting through the private sector also proved beneficial. for example, lebanon 
suffered from a lack of clean drinking water in areas of high refugee concentrations. this 
was due, in part, to weak water supply networks that suffered excessive loss because of 
old and leaking pipes, as well as to increases in demand. with financing from the eu, and 
technical support from the swiss development corporation, unhcr worked with private 
lebanese companies, the ministry of water and energy and local water establishments, for 
the construction of new water wells and storage tanks, and for the replacement of water 
supply networks. the project (with initial funding of 14 million) sought to bring clean 
water supply to over 11,000 homes upon completion. 
by and large, the engagement of the private sector in the lebanon refugee response in the 
early years was not robust. subsequent years have seen much greater engagement. today, 
there  are  multiple  fora  seeking  to  harness  not  just  the  funding  potential  of  the  private 
sector, but, even more importantly, to forge partnerships for humanitarian action in new 
and creative ways.16 

16   unhcr is investing in innovative approaches with its partners. unhcrs innovation unit collaborates 
with unhcr divisions, refugees, academia, and the private sector to creatively address complex refugee 
challenges (see http://www.unhcr.org/innovation/).  see also the new york declaration on refugees 
and migrants, g.a. res. 71/1, u.n. doc a/res/71/1 ( oct. 3, 2016), annex 1, which establishes the 
comprehensive refugee response framework (crr). this will engage a wide array of stakeholders and 
include both humanitarian responses and development actions. it embraces private sector engagement, 
diverse forms of investment, and innovative humanitarian delivery: http://www.unhcr.org/en-us/events/
conferences/57e39d987/new-york-declaration-refugees-migrants.html. 

102

journal on migration and human securityiv. conclusion
since the onset of the refugee influx in lebanon, there have already been a number of 
developments which bode well for ensuring more effective emergency responses. first, the 
whole model of contingency planning has been reviewed and replaced by what is turning 
out to be a better means to prepare for crisis than what was used in the early years of 
the syria conflict. the new model gives agencies an enhanced means of doing scenario 
planning that is not constrained by political considerations. this in turn can help to ensure 
that the standby arrangements for staffing, program delivery, and financial management are 
in place before a planning scenario takes effect. 
significantly,  as  well,  is  that  the  divide  between  development  and  humanitarian  action 
is, at least theoretically, dissolving, with more states, development actors, and financial 
institutions recognizing the need to shore up public institutions, services, and infrastructure 
earlier in an emergency to meet the needs of refugees and hosting communities. this should 
lead to humanitarian responses that are complemented by development ones  conjoined 
action rather than consecutive action, which has been the situation in the past. while the 
united nations will continue to be a large player in the humanitarian sphere, it will need to 
partner more alongside much larger development partners for better outcomes for refugees 
and their hosts. the comprehensive refugee response framework, adopted by the un 
general assembly as part of the new york declaration of 2016, is a promising blueprint.17 
another positive development has been the increased interest in and appetite for the use of 
innovative technologies to help provide assistance in cost-effective ways. in lebanon, such 
innovations enhanced data collection, brought new means of communication and learning 
to refugees, and improved needs assessments, planning, implementation, monitoring, and 
evaluation. if there is a weakness here, it is in the sharing of such innovative measures in 
ways that operations around the world can benefit. and while these new technologies are 
assisting in inter-agency coordination, the united nations could revise its own processes to 
ensure they are streamlined, non-duplicative, and engage a wider set of partners.
just  as  the  united  nations  could  positively  rationalize  its  coordination  processes, 
emergency  responses  would  be  enhanced  with  efforts  by  donors  to  streamline  their 
reporting  requirements,  coordinate  more  on  partner  assessments,  provide  more  flexible 
and multi-year funding, and join up their humanitarian and development programming. 
these ambitions are prominent in the 2016 world humanitarian summit, with some also 
reflected in commitments found in the new york declaration for refugees and migrants. 
at  the  local  level,  more  needs  to  be  done  to  ensure  that  humanitarian  agencies  fully 
understand  the  full  range  of  relevant  accountabilities  and  responsibilities  from  central 
to local authorities, and that there is an appropriate level of engagement with both. un 
agencies  have  recently  pledged  to  invest  in  local  partners  (for  example,  in  discussions 
during the 2016 world humanitarian summit). efforts underway to move forward on these 
matters with ngos and private sector partners need to be shared and evaluated. enhanced 
engagement of beneficiaries is already a tried and tested means for achieving appropriate 
program design and delivery, but lessons and best practices still need to be more widely 
shared. 

17   new york declaration for refugees and migrants, annex 1.

103

responding to a refugee influx: lessons from lebanonfinally, the best planned emergency refugee response is one that never needs to get off 
the ground because the anticipated causes for flight are mitigated and safety and security 
restored. the fact that the syrian crisis has extended as long as it has, with such devastating 
effect on individual lives, the country and the region, speaks to the enormous international 
deficit in conflict prevention and mitigation. none of the lessons covered in this paper 
address that deficit, nor will remedying the gaps identified above solve this most difficult 
foundational problem. 
 
references

brd (beyond reform and development). 2015. mapping of civil societies in lebanon. 
http://eeas.europa.eu/archives/delegations/lebanon/documents/

beirut:  brd. 
news/20150416_2_en.pdf.

chaaban,  jad,  hala  ghattas,  rima  habib,  sari  hanafi,  nadine  sahyoun,  nisreen  salti, 
karin seyfert, and nadia naamani. 2010. socio-economic survey of palestinian 
refugees in lebanon. beiruit: american university of beirut. http://www.unrwa.
org/userfiles/2011012074253.pdf.

iasc  (inter-agency  standing  committee).  n.d.  emergency  response  preparedness. 

https://www.humanitarianresponse.info/en/programme-cycle/space/page/
preparedness.

mehe  (ministry  of  education  and  higher  education).  2014.  reaching  all  children 
with education in lebanon (r.a.c.e.). beirut: mehe. http://www.mehe.gov.lb/
uploads/file/2015/feb2015/projects/racefinalenglish2.pdf.

the grand bargain  a shared commitment to better serve people in need. 2016. 
http://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/grand_bargain_

istanbul. 
final_22_may_final-2.pdf.

united nations high commissioner for refugees (unhcr). 2014. lebanese communities 
in  focus:  supporting  communities  protecting  refugees.  http://data.unhcr.org/
syrianrefugees/download.php?id=7825.

. 2017. preparedness package for refugee emergencies. https://emergency.unhcr.

org/entry/55576/preparedness-package-for-refugee-emergencies-ppre.

un secretary-general. 2016. outcome of the world humanitarian summit. report of the 
secretary-general submitted to the un general assembly, august 23. u.n. doc. 
a/71/353,  71st  sess.  https://www.worldhumanitariansummit.org/sites/default/
files/media/a-71-353%20-%20sg%20report%20on%20the%20outcome%20
of%20the%20whs.pdf.

world  bank.  2014.  lebanon    emergency  national  poverty  targeting  program 
project. washington, dc: world bank. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/
en/810511467987899324/pdf/pad1030-english-p149242-public-final-
leb-enptp-english.pdf. 

104

journal on migration and human security