working together: building 
successful policy and program 
partnerships for immigrant 
integration1

els de graauw 
baruch college, the city university of new york

irene bloemraad 
university of california, berkeley

executive summary
supporting  and  investing  in  the  integration  of  immigrants  and  their 
children  is  critically  important  to  us  society.  successful  integration 
contributes to the nations economic vitality, its civic and political health, 
and its cultural diversity. but although the united states has a good track 
record  on  immigrant  integration,  outcomes  could  be  better.  a  national, 
coherent  immigrant  integration  policy  infrastructure  is  needed.  this 
infrastructure  can  build  on  long-standing  partnerships  between  civil 
society  and  us  public  institutions.  such  partnerships,  advanced  under 
republican- and democratic-led administrations, were initially established 
to  facilitate  european  immigrants  integration  in  large  american  cities, 
and later extended to help refugees fleeing religious persecution and war. 
in the twenty-first century, we must expand this foundation by drawing on 
the growing activism by cities and states, new civil society initiatives, and 
public-private partnerships that span the country.
a  robust  national  integration  policy  infrastructure  must  be  vertically 
integrated  to  include  different  levels  of  government  and  horizontally 
applied  across  public  and  private  sector  actors  and  different  types  of 
immigrant  destinations.  the  resultant  policy  should  leverage  public-
private partnerships, drawing on the energy, ideas, and work of community-
based  nonprofit  organizations  as  well  as  the  leadership  and  support  of 
philanthropy, business, education, faith-based, and other institutions. a 
new coordinating office to facilitate interagency cooperation is needed in 
the executive branch; the mandate and programs of the office of refugee 
resettlement need to be secured and where possible expanded; the outreach 
and  coordinating  role  of  the  office  of  citizenship  needs  to  be  extended, 
including  through  a  more  robust  grant  program  to  community-based 

1   we are indebted to donald kerwin and philip wolgin for helpful feedback. the authors are equal co-
authors.

 2017 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 5 number 1 (2017): 105-123organizations; and congress needs to develop legislation and appropriate 
funding for a comprehensive integration policy addressed to all, and not 
just humanitarian immigrants.
the federal investments in immigrant and refugee integration we propose 
are a big ask for any administration; they seem especially unlikely under 
the trump administration, whose efforts focus on enforcement and border 
control, targeting undocumented and legal immigrants alike. yet immigrant 
integration is not and should not be a partisan issue. federal politicians 
across the political spectrum need to realize, as many local officials and 
a  large  segment  of  the  public  already  do,  that  successful  immigrant 
integration  is  a  win-win  for  everybody.  when  immigrants  have  more 
opportunities to learn english, to improve their schooling and professional 
training, to start businesses, and to access citizenship, we all benefit. a 
majority  of  the  american  public  supports  immigrant  integration,  from 
proposals for learning english to a path to citizenship for undocumented 
immigrants.  local  and  state  governments  are  setting  up  initiatives  to 
promote integration. if the federal government will not act, cities, states, 
and civil society organizations must continue to work together to build an 
integration infrastructure from the bottom up. 

i. introduction
the  united  states  welcomes  hundreds  of  thousands  of  newcomers  every  year.  yet  it 
lacks a national, coherent immigrant integration policy. officials in the us government 
accountability office note that no single federal entity has been designated to lead the 
creation, implementation, and coordination of a national immigrant integration capability 
(gao 2011, 25). academics have characterized the american approach as laissez-faire 
integration  or  a  patchwork  of  policies  (bloemraad  2006;  bloemraad  and  de  graauw 
2012a-b; de graauw 2016a; heisler 1992; jimnez 2011; schmidt, sr. 2007). in the media, 
whether today or a century ago, integration is represented by horatio alger-type stories 
of poor immigrants achieving the american dream through individual hard work and the 
support of family and friends. the twentieth-century andrew carnegie, a poor scottish 
immigrant  turned  steel  industry  tycoon  and  philanthropist,  is  the  equivalent  of  todays 
silicon valley giant sergey brin, the google co-founder born in russia, or entrepreneurs 
do won and jin sook, the korean-born husband and wife team who founded the fashion 
chain forever 21 with $11,000 and high school educations. in these narratives of immigrant 
integration, the role of government is largely absent.
such a laissez-faire approach is short-sighted in its depiction of the past and, critically, as a 
roadmap for the future. laissez-faire narratives do not acknowledge that for over a century 
governmental actors in the united states have played a role in immigrant integration. these 
efforts have expanded notably over the last decade, especially at the local and state levels, 
producing diverse partnerships between civil society and federal, state, county, and local 
governments around immigrant settlement. the failure to build on these foundations means 
that immigrant integration outcomes will fall short of what they could be, to the detriment 

106

journal on migration and human securityof the nation as a whole. in many respects the united states can be proud of its record of 
incorporating newcomers, as a recent national academy of sciences report makes clear 
(waters and pineau 2016), but comparisons with other countries show that benchmarks fall 
short at times, especially around naturalization, economic self-sufficiency, and residential 
integration (alba and foner 2015; oecd and eu 2015; vigdor 2011). a more deliberate 
federal role in a comprehensive immigrant integration strategy is critical for improving 
immigrants societal integration.
we argue for the development of an integrated policy. such a policy should apply nationally 
and link to current city, county, and state settlement infrastructures and initiatives, as well as 
to existing civil society efforts. where local integration initiatives do not yet exist, the new 
federal policy would provide goals, best practices, and funding to establish local programs 
and support infrastructures. building on successes in refugee resettlement and the growing 
number  of  city  and  state  immigrant  affairs  offices,  the  resultant  policy  would  leverage 
public-private partnerships, drawing on the energy, ideas, and work of community-based 
nonprofits  as  well  as  the  leadership  and  support  of  philanthropy,  business,  education, 
faith-based, and other institutions. such partnerships would allow for local innovation and 
tailoring programs to the unique needs of a particular community, while a national scope 
would ensure baseline settlement support across the country as part of a cohesive vision for 
successful immigrant and refugee integration in the united states.
in what follows, we first discuss immigrant integration in the twentieth century, highlighting 
historic examples of public-private partnerships to build on today. we next outline immigrant 
integration efforts in the twenty-first century, highlighting the increased activism of city 
and  state  governments,  the  creation  of  new  civil  society  initiatives  and  public-private 
partnerships, and recent federal interest in immigrant integration. we conclude by making 
the case for a more robust national integration policy infrastructure, one that is vertically 
integrated to include different levels of government and horizontally applied across public 
and private sector actors and different types of immigrant destinations. by working together 
with federal leadership and support, we can build nationwide partnerships for immigrant 
integration  that  lay  the  groundwork  for  many  success  stories,  for  newcomers  and  the 
communities in which they reside.

ii.  twentieth  century  integration:  laissez-faire  with 
public-private partnerships
immigrant integration during  the twentieth century is  often portrayed as  a  laissez-faire 
process  relying  primarily  on  grassroots  initiative,  not  public  planning  or  government 
intervention (e.g., jimnez 2011; schmidt, sr. 2007). immigrants became part of american 
society by using their own resources and ingenuity, the help of family and friends, and  
on occasion  the assistance of local community organizations. there is much truth in 
these narratives. immigrants could count on an expanding industrial economy and a robust 
public education system to help them and their children secure economic mobility and a 
comfortable middle-class lifestyle, but government was otherwise not proactive in creating 
or promoting integration pathways. just as the invisible hand of laissez-faire capitalism 
was assumed to produce a self-regulated market based on the individual actions of many 
people, the individual actions of immigrants eager for a better life in the united states were 

107

working together: building successful policy and program partnershipsassumed to function as the invisible hand in immigrants societal integration (bloemraad 
and de graauw 2012a).

a. 

immigrant  organizations,  settlement  houses,  and 

americanization efforts: organized assistance before world war ii
laissez-faire  narratives  ignore,  however,  longstanding  american  partnerships  between 
civil society and public institutions. within immigrant communities, immigrant-run private 
charities  and  voluntary  organizations  have  long  helped  compatriots  get  a  job,  secure 
business  loans,  encourage  citizenship,  or  provide  food,  clothing,  and  funeral  benefits 
during tough times. starting in the late nineteenth century, us-born social reformers also 
became involved, setting up settlement houses. first established in new york, chicago, 
and boston, by 1911, 413 such institutions were tallied across 32 states, the district of 
columbia, and the hawaiian islands (woods and kennedy 1911, vi). usually funded by 
religious groups, charitable associations, and wealthy residents, settlement houses targeted 
the poor, including many immigrants in large american cities in the midwest and northeast. 
these organizations, within and outside immigrant communities, built a tradition of civil 
society engagement that continues to this day (de graauw 2016a).
as settlement houses spread, so did the americanization movement. it brought governments 
from the local to federal levels into integration efforts, often in partnership with charitable 
groups,  businesses,  social  reformers,  and  local  school  boards.  their  efforts  were  often 
paternalistic, nativist, and coercive (higham 1994 [1955]), but at times could be benign 
and  supportive.  rather  than  laissez-faire,  public  institutions  engaged  with  local  and 
immigrant partners. for example, the us board of education established a division of 
immigrant education that funded english language, literacy, and civics instruction, while 
the  us  bureau  of  naturalization  partnered  with  school  officials  to  identify  adults  who 
might benefit from citizenship classes (king 2000, 87-120; schneider 2001).
some early government initiatives came with resources. over four-fifths of state legislatures 
in the northeast and midwest passed legislation with funding support for adult english and 
citizenship classes in the interwar period; in 1927-1928, these states allocated, on average, 
$1.42 per alien resident for naturalization education (fox 2012; fox and bloemraad 2015, 
193). at about $19.50 per noncitizen in 2016 dollars, today this would be the equivalent of 
the federal government spending over $440 million on the almost 22.6 million noncitizens 
living  in  the  country.  in  2016,  however,  the  us  citizenship  and  immigration  services 
(uscis) awarded less than $10 million in grants to 46 organizations through the uscis 
citizenship and integration grant program.2

b. post-war partnerships for successful integration: the case of 

refugee resettlement
refugee resettlement offers another public-private collaborative framework for integration, 
one  that  built  on  pre-war  organizations.  the  oldest  voluntary  agency  still  engaged  in 
2    see  https://www.uscis.gov/about-us/citizenship-and-integration-grant-program.  data  on  the  noncitizen 
population of the united states is from the 2015 american community survey, one-year estimates, available 
at https://factfinder.census.gov.

108

journal on migration and human securityrefugee resettlement today is the hebrew immigrant aid society, founded in new york 
city in 1881 to assist jews fleeing pogroms in russia and eastern europe. other private 
resettlement  organizations,  with  religious  or  secular  roots,  sprung  up  in  the  1930s  and 
1940s as europe descended into fascism, communist purges, and war (zucker and zucker 
1987). working overseas and in the united states, these groups became major players in 
refugee resettlement after world war ii, settling hundreds of thousands of people largely 
using private resources (holman 1996). their efforts led the federal displaced persons 
committee to speak approvingly of the religious and welfare organizations through whose 
cooperative activities so many of the displaced persons have come to the united states 
and which have rendered a most commendable service in partnership with displaced 
persons commissions or committees in 33 us states (dpc 1950, 22, 25).
after world war ii, the relationship between voluntary agencies and government gradually 
became more permanent, including professionalized services by nonprofits and increased 
government funding and oversight. after thousands of hungarian refugees arrived in 1956, 
the federal government offered voluntary agencies $40 per person to defray transportation 
costs (holman 1996, 6). in 1959, the influx of cuban emigrs in miami severely strained 
local, county, and state capacity to secure housing, jobs, and schools. in response, congress 
passed the migration and refugee assistance act in 1962, the first federal law authorizing 
and financing domestic refugee assistance, although it restricted support to cubans in miami 
(holman 1996). however, when the fall of saigon sent 130,000 southeast asian refugees 
to the united states, congress drew on similar authority and logic to pass the indochina 
migration  and  refugee assistance act  of  1975.  it  established  a  program  giving  states 
federal funds to provide medical assistance and financial support to needy refugees and to 
finance integration programs such as english language and employment training. the 1976 
indochinese refugee children assistance act reimbursed states for education and special 
language instruction costs.  unlike the prior program for  cubans,  these initiatives were 
national. another wave of organizations, often termed mutual assistance associations, were 
founded to provide linguistically and culturally appropriate services in refugees places of 
settlement. in the late 1970s, congress reauthorized federal resettlement assistance, while 
oversight of funding and programs moved around among federal agencies.
in  1980,  congress  enacted  the  refugee act  to  end  the  ad  hoc,  patchwork  approach  to 
refugee admissions and settlement. in addition to providing a uniform procedure for refugee 
admissions, the act permanently authorized federal assistance to promote refugees self-
sufficiency and established the office of refugee resettlement (orr) in the us department 
of health and human services (dhhs). an early assessment concluded that calling this 
a single program would be a misnomer, as it was more accurately a complex web of 
federal government, voluntary agency, and state and local government roles that provide 
the overall framework for resettlement efforts (haines 1985, 7). despite the challenges of 
a policy and programmatic web developed in fits and starts, it nonetheless has served as a 
valuable safety net from which refugees could establish themselves, a support structure not 
available to economic or family-sponsored migrants facing similar integration challenges.
today, the web of federal, voluntary sector, state and local partnerships around refugee 
resettlement continues, with a focus on getting refugees to economic self-sufficiency as soon 
as possible. the us department of states (doss) bureau of population, refugees, and 

109

working together: building successful policy and program partnershipsmigration funds cooperative agreements with a range of public and private organizations 
to facilitate initial settlement through the us reception and placement program. in 2016, 
a refugee helped by one of the nine contracted voluntary agencies would be greeted at 
the  airport  and  brought  to  a  furnished  residence  stocked  with  some  clothes,  culturally 
appropriate foods, and other necessities. someone from the agency would provide referral 
services and practical assistance, from applying for a social security card and registering 
children for school to helping arrange medical appointments, enroll in english language 
classes,  find  employment,  or  use  local  public  transportation.  under  the  2017  program, 
dos provides agencies with $2,025 per refugee, amounts often supplemented with agency 
contributions from other public and private sources since grants are often inadequate to 
cover costs fully (dos 2016).
a second set of programs administered by orr provides transitional settlement assistance 
to refugees and other designated humanitarian groups.3 orr programs provide formula 
grants to states to provide refugees with cash and medical assistance, and offer grants to a 
range of government and voluntary sector partners to fund social and employment services. 
partners can include public agencies, faith-based or secular nonprofits, and ethnic-specific 
mutual  assistance  associations,  many  of  which  also  contribute  matching  or  in-kind 
resources. in the 2015 fiscal year, congress voted $1,559,884,000 in appropriations for 
orr programs, much of it for cash and medical assistance (bruno 2015, 8). when the 
refugee assistance program was first established in 1980, federal assistance was available 
for up to 36 months. since 1991, refugees are funded for just eight months, often too short 
a period to secure economic self-sufficiency for refugees with limited education or arriving 
with physical or mental trauma (bruno 2011; nawyn 2011).

c. a threadbare patchwork for other immigrants

the policy and programmatic web of refugee resettlement faces challenges in integrating 
humanitarian migrants, especially as orrs capacity was stretched serving unaccompanied 
minors from central america. however, the refugee infrastructure is still more cohesive 
and extensive than the threadbare, loose patchwork of integration initiatives in place for 
other immigrants. most non-refugee immigrants come to the united states under family 
reunification provisions of the 1965 immigration and nationality act. these newcomers 
can call on their families for initial settlement support, but individual families can only 
do so much. more sustained public support is necessary for optimal long-term integration 
outcomes.
we might expect the main federal agency responsible for immigration to provide leadership 
on integration. but throughout much of the post-wwii period, the us immigration and 
naturalization service (ins) did not engage in proactive immigrant integration work. at 
most,  it  oversaw  the  administration  and  adjudication  of  naturalization,  which  included 
providing public information on how to become a citizen. the ins generally assumed 
that  those  granted  permanent  residence  through  employment  preferences  had  the  skills 
necessary to integrate, while those sponsored by family could turn to them for help. indeed, 
3   immigration and nationality act  412(c), (e). groups eligible for refugee resettlement include official 
refugees  under  the  act,  successful  asylum  applicants,  cuban  and  haitian  entrants,  trafficking  victims, 
amerasians and immediate family, and iraqi and afghan special immigrants (bruno 2011, 3-4).

110

journal on migration and human securityunlike the partnerships that characterized refugee resettlement, the ins did not have legal 
authority  to  act  as  a  grant-making  agency  (bloemraad  2006,  126).  when  former  ins 
commissioner doris meissner tried to orient the agency to a more proactive stance, the 
citizenship usa program came under attack as a partisan effort to naturalize potential 
democratic party supporters in advance of the 1996 presidential election (oig 2000).
when the us department of homeland security was created by the bush administration in 
2002 to replace the ins, congressional legislation included a provision to establish a new 
office of citizenship within uscis. this offices mission is to provide federal leadership, 
tools,  and  resources  to  proactively  foster  immigrant  integration  (office  of  citizenship 
2017). much of its work centers on providing naturalization information, but in a break with 
ins practice, the office also aims to build community capacity to prepare immigrants for 
citizenship. this includes funding for collaboration with community-based organizations and 
other partners to welcome immigrants, promote english-language learning, communicate 
the rights and responsibilities of citizenship, and encourage naturalization. the demand for 
these citizenship and integration grants far outstrips available funding, however. in 2009, 
when the program started, there were 293 applications for $1.2 million in grants, with only 
13 organizations eventually funded (waters and pineau 2016, 177). from 2009 to 2016, the 
program awarded a total of $63 million, averaging less than $8 million per year, roughly 
half a percent of allocations for refugee resettlement.4
beyond  the  uscis  grant  program,  a  patchwork  of  other  integration  initiatives  exists. 
the white  house task  force  on  new americans  (2015b,  50)  identified  58  immigrant 
integration  programs  administered  by  10  different  federal  agencies.  of  course,  once 
naturalized,  immigrant-origin  citizens  can  access  the  same  programs  as  native-born 
citizens.  but  before  citizenship,  immigrants  can  also  sometimes  get  help  under  federal 
policies that seek to increase the life chances of economically disadvantaged us residents. 
federal education laws help english-language learners. federal civil rights laws protect 
against discrimination in housing and the workplace and seek to promote greater ethno-
racial and gender equality through preferential hiring and contracting policies. federal labor 
and employment law protections  including minimum wage and overtime provisions, 
workplace safety standards, and union organizing rights  generally apply to all workers 
regardless  of  citizenship  and  documentation  status.  important  safety  net  policies   
including temporary aid to needy families, the childrens health insurance program, 
medicaid, food stamps, and supplemental security income  extend to legal immigrants 
with a minimum of five years of us residence. other programs have a citizenship criterion, 
rendering  them  unavailable  to  undocumented  immigrants  or  legal  immigrants.  these 
restrictions generate significant integration vulnerabilities for immigrants in their first five 
years in the united states, years that are critical in accessing good jobs, safe housing, 
and opportunities to become socially integrated. thus, while mainstream policies at times 
support legal immigrants, they do not amount to a coherent national program of immigrant 
integration, especially as most are tailored with native-born residents in mind (bloemraad 
and de graauw 2012a-b).
more broadly, the federal government offers some baseline constitutional protections that 
encompass all people living in the united states and that also frame the rights and societal 

4   on grants awarded, see https://www.uscis.gov/about-us/citizenship-and-integration-grant-program. 

111

working together: building successful policy and program partnershipsintegration of immigrants. the fourteenth amendment to the us constitution guarantees 
due process and equal protection to any person, and it guarantees the birthright citizenship 
for any child born in the united states, thereby rupturing the intergenerational transmission 
of noncitizenship or undocumented status. the us supreme courts plyler v. doe (1982) 
decision guarantees that all children  including those who are undocumented  have 
the right to a free and equal k-12 public education. public schools are important engines 
for immigrant integration because it is there that children learn english, american history 
and civics, and it is one of the first entry points where immigrant parents interact with their 
broader community. in short, despite laissez-faire narratives, existing public policies and 
programs do influence immigrant integration. but much more can be done, a challenge 
increasingly taken up over the last decade by local and state governments and civil society 
organizations.

iii. twenty-first century integration: growing subnational 
leadership,  new  public-private  partnerships,  and 
increased federal attention
the twenty-first century ushered in new dynamics in immigrant integration policy and 
programs. we see growing activism by cities and states, the launch of new civil society 
initiatives and public-private partnerships spanning the country, and some federal interest 
in immigrant integration. these developments provide an important foundation on which 
to build a more cohesive federal integration policy.

a. growing municipal and state leadership

in  2014,  nashville  mayor  karl  dean  launched  the  office  of  new americans  to  serve 
the metro areas immigrant residents, signing an executive order surrounded by council 
members, department heads, members of the local chamber of commerce, and nonprofit 
partners. although not a historic immigrant destination, nashville joins a growing number 
of cities and states that have created new programs and institutions to promote the integration 
of  new  residents.  in  2016,  41  us  cities  had  a  total  of  44  formalized  offices  dedicated 
to immigrant affairs or immigrant communities (de graauw 2016b). these offices have 
different names, including the office of new bostonians in boston, the mayors office 
of immigrant affairs in new york city and atlanta, the office of international relations 
and diaspora affairs in newark, and the office of new americans in chicago, houston, 
buffalo, and nashville. and while most states have long had offices and programs serving 
refugees, in 2016 there were five states  california, illinois, massachusetts, michigan, 
and  new york    with  offices  or  staff  mandated  to  serve  immigrant  populations  more 
broadly. the oldest office with an exclusive focus on immigrant issues, created in 1986, 
is in new york city, which also is the biggest and best resourced office, with over 50 full-
time staff. in contrast, the vast majority of other city offices, and all state offices, were set 
up in the last 10 years, as in nashville. they are less institutionalized, have fewer paid staff, 
and operate on more limited budgets.
beyond formal offices, at least 90 municipalities have developed commissions, committees, 
councils, task forces, boards, initiatives, and programs dedicated to immigrant issues or 

112

journal on migration and human securityimmigrant communities (de graauw 2016b). examples include the immigrant integration 
task  force  in  charlotte,  the  welcoming  immigrant  task  force  in  tucson,  the  new 
americans task force in lincoln, the commission on immigrant affairs in austin, and the 
welcoming city initiatives in dayton, columbus, and pittsburgh. these bodies generally 
have fewer explicit powers, fewer staff and resources, or a narrower, finite set of tasks 
than  formal  offices. they  can,  however,  be  an  important  stepping  stone  toward  further 
institution-building.  together,  city  and  state  immigrant  affairs  offices  and  these  other 
municipal bodies demonstrate how the new push for immigrant integration in the united 
states is coming from lower levels of government, not the federal government. executive 
leadership is clearly central: mayors and governors, not legislatures, have created these 
offices and other bodies.
integration projects are being advanced in a great variety of cities spanning the country. 
most  big  cities  (and  traditional  gateway  states)  now  have  immigrant  affairs  offices, 
including longstanding immigrant gateways such as boston, chicago, los angeles, new 
york city, and san francisco. however, offices also exist in newer destinations, including 
atlanta, nashville, orlando, and washington, dc, and in former and reemerging immigrant 
destinations,  such  as  baltimore,  buffalo,  denver,  detroit,  and  philadelphia.  immigrant 
affairs offices also can be found in cities with smaller populations, such as allentown, 
pa (117,942 residents) as well as in cities with foreign-born populations well below the 
national  average  of  13  percent,  such  as  detroit  (5%  foreign-born  residents).  executive 
leadership is important, but not necessarily in a top-down imposition disconnected from 
electoral  support. although  nine  offices  (20%  or  9/44)  operate  in  cities  with  council-
manager forms of government, most offices (73% or 32/44) are in cities with mayor-council 
forms of government, where the mayor has an independent electoral base. a bit over half 
of city immigrant affairs offices (59% or 26/44) are located in states where the majority of 
voters are democrat, but they can also be found in states with wide-ranging climates on 
immigration issues. they are found in arizona, the state with the most negative climate 
for immigrants (with an immigrant climate index of -60) and in california and illinois, 
the two states with the most positive climates for immigrants (with indexes of 33 and 38, 
respectively).5
several  common  factors  underlie  the  recent  surge  in  immigrant  affairs  offices.  their 
establishment  follows  the  decades-long  growth  of  the  foreign-born  population  in  the 
united states and immigrants greater geographic dispersion since the late 1990s. it also 
responds to the lack of attention to integration by federal officials, who have focused on 
enforcement and border control. many cities and states are stepping into the policy void, 
often because they feel they have no choice. city and state officials are tasked with devising 
and implementing public policies that promote a productive local economy and a healthy 
and  safe  environment  for  all;  they  feel  that  they  cannot  ignore  the  needs  and  interests 
of growing immigrant communities in their jurisdictions. in announcing the creation of 
the  nashville  office  of  new americans,  the  mayor  underscored  that  nearly  60  percent 
of the citys population growth since 2000 came from immigration, new americans are 
overrepresented in four of nashvilles 10 largest industries, and a third of children under 18 

5   the immigrant climate index sums up each states environment for immigrants, positive and negative, by 
quantifying immigration laws enacted by states as well as cities and counties in each state between 2005 and 
2009. see pham and van (2014) for more detail on the construction of the index.

113

working together: building successful policy and program partnershipsin the metro area live in bilingual or non-english speaking households.6 the growth in city 
immigrant affairs offices is also the result of the wider availability of technical assistance and 
support from organizations and coalitions dedicated to promoting immigrant integration at 
the municipal level. one example is welcoming america, a nonprofit organization created 
in 2009 and headquartered in the atlanta area that has worked with over 70 municipalities 
and  40  nonprofits  nationwide  to  build  communities  that  foster  immigrant  integration 
(welcoming america 2017).
we can also identify commonalities in what these offices do and seek to accomplish. they 
aim to welcome immigrants and foster positive public discourse. to this end, they convene 
local stakeholders  law enforcement and other city officials, nonprofit service providers, 
immigrant advocacy organizations, religious institutions, and business organizations  
to facilitate interaction between immigrants and native-born residents. immigrant affairs 
offices also make the case that immigrants are of current and future economic importance to 
cities, metropolitan areas, and states. they publicize immigrants economic contributions 
and develop initiatives to retain immigrant talent and support immigrant entrepreneurs. 
they streamline existing city and state integration services, and they encourage immigrant 
civic engagement, invest in immigrant leaders, and nurture new community organizations 
that serve immigrants. such efforts can start small with citizenship ceremonies, diversity 
and  multicultural  celebrations,  and  recruiting  volunteers  for  city  events.  resources 
permitting,  immigrant  affairs  offices  can  also  spearhead  grander  initiatives  that  include 
social change fellowships to cultivate new civic leadership. more institutionalized offices 
also develop new policies such as language access and municipal id card legislation and 
initiatives to help implement, locally, the federal deferred action for childhood arrivals 
and naturalization programs. in sum, cities and states have developed different policies and 
practices that provide immigrants, including the undocumented, opportunities for inclusion 
and a sense of belonging even in the absence of federal legalization and integration policies 
(de graauw 2016; suro 2015).
the experiences of city and state immigrant affairs offices highlight several challenges. 
key is the lack of resources to get things done. limited staff and small budgets hamper 
most offices ability to develop new initiatives, especially as municipal and state budgets 
remain under stress. the struggle to survive and justify their existence, especially in places 
where  there  is  opposition  to  immigration,  can  detract  from  efforts  to  move  the  needle 
on  immigrant  integration.  the  federal  division  of  powers  also  constrains  city  offices, 
and even state initiatives, as does the fact that determination of legal status  whether 
citizenship through naturalization, legalization of undocumented residents, or temporary 
protection from deportation  must emanate from the federal government. without federal 
immigration reform and a cohesive national integration program, the impact of city and 
state immigrant affairs offices will have limits.
for immigrant affairs offices to succeed, their staff need to tap into the existing knowledge, 
practice, and culture within immigrant communities in their cities and states. sustained 
collaborations  between  immigrant  affairs  offices  and  community  organizations  carry 

6   see new americans in nashville: a snapshot of the foreign-born population, a factsheet distributed 
with  the  press  release  for  the  new  office,  available  at  https://www.nashville.gov/portals/0/sitecontent/
mayorsoffice/docs/news/140922-mona-factsheet.pdf. 

114

journal on migration and human securitymany  benefits.  for  immigrant  affairs  offices,  such  collaborations  enable  them  to  learn 
about needs in immigrant communities, so they can develop appropriate programs and 
initiatives to respond. for community organizations, such collaborations open access to 
municipal and state decision makers and possibly to funding to support their work. finally, 
for immigrants, these collaborations offer a helping hand and opportunities to be engaged 
in local and state civic and political affairs. these collaborative benefits are constrained, 
however,  in  newer  immigrant  destinations  with  fewer  potential  partner  organizations. 
those jurisdictions require investments to nurture new community organizations and build 
capacity  for  immigrant  integration.  here  we  see  openings  for  the  federal  government, 
philanthropic organizations, and even the business sector to get involved.

b. new public-private partnerships and increased federal interest
in  recent  years,  new  initiatives  have  also  sprouted  bringing  non-governmental  and 
governmental actors from across the country together to address immigrant integration 
issues. welcoming america, mentioned earlier, is one example. others include the national 
partnership for new americans, a coalition created in 2010 of 37 regional immigrant and 
refugee rights organizations spanning 31 states that work to influence integration policies 
and practices at the local, state, and federal levels (npna 2017), and cities for action, a 
large national coalition of 123 mayors and leaders from 20 county governments formed in 
2014 to build stronger, welcoming, and inclusive cities through immigration action (cities 
for action 2017). the new americans campaign (nac), launched in 2011 and funded 
by a network of six national foundations, gives resources to nine national and over 100 
local nonprofits to provide citizenship assistance to immigrants in 18 large metro areas 
across the country. by mid-july 2015, nac-affiliated organizations had completed over 
230,000 naturalization applications (nac 2016). and the partnership for a new american 
economy, launched in 2010, is a coalition of 500 mayors and business leaders nationwide 
who advocate for immigration reform and public and private programs that offer english-
language,  civics,  and  educational  classes  to  immigrants  (pnae  2017).  absent  robust 
federal engagement, city, county, and state leaders have teamed up in vertical and horizontal 
networks with civil society organizations to further immigrant integration.
these  are  all  bottom-up  initiatives  where  local  government  actors  and  grassroots  civil 
society leaders, at times with significant foundation and business backing, have taken the 
lead in building local, regional, and national momentum for immigrant integration. the 
new public-private partnerships focus on policy innovation as well as immigrant leadership 
development and improved, more efficient service delivery to immigrant communities. as 
interactions between public and private sector actors have become more coordinated and 
sophisticated, they have facilitated mutual learning and sharing of resources. there are 
now regular convenings where city, county, and state leaders, funders, and practitioners 
share best practices, including the annual meetings of the national immigrant integration 
conference (since 2009) and the welcoming economies global network (since 2012), 
focused on the midwest. all in all, we find a growing energy to sustain, expand, and scale 
up municipal and state efforts and public-private partnerships for immigrant integration.
the absence of a coherent, robust federal integration policy remains, but the new energy 
and activism has not escaped federal attention. in 2006, president george w. bush created, 

115

working together: building successful policy and program partnershipsby  executive  order  13404,  the  task  force  on  new americans  to  investigate  ways  to 
strengthen the efforts of the department of homeland security and federal, state, and 
local  agencies  to  help  legal  immigrants  embrace  the  common  core  of american  civic 
culture, learn our common language, and fully become americans. after little engagement 
with local officials or grassroots organizations, the task force published its 84-page report 
in december 2008. it recommended building a modern-day americanization movement, in 
large part reiterating the integration philosophy and approach of the first americanization 
movement  a  century  earlier  (dhs-tfna  2008).  the  report  emphasized  the  need  for 
federal leadership and a national integration strategy that coordinates existing efforts by 
local and state governments, community-based and civic organizations, public libraries, 
adult educators, business organizations, and foundations. during its 2.5-year existence, the 
task force provided some training and resources to public libraries, adult educators, and 
immigrant-serving  organizations  narrowly  focused  on  civics  and  citizenship  education. 
it  did  not  address  economic  integration  or  the  integration  challenges  of  undocumented 
immigrants.
similar  inquiry  and  advisory  efforts  characterized  the  next  administration.  in  2014, 
president barack obama established, by presidential memorandum, the white house task 
force on new americans, an interagency effort to create a coordinated and more deliberate 
federal  strategy  for  immigrant  and  refugee  integration.  the  task  forces  strategic  plan, 
published in april 2015, was developed by representatives from nearly 20 federal agencies 
and drew on recommendations from 350 organizations and more than 1,000 members of 
the public. it outlined 16 core goals and 48 recommendations to support the linguistic, 
economic, and civic integration of immigrants and refugees (whtfna 2015b). unlike 
the bush administration report, the plan provided a whole-of-society integration approach 
that included a broad range of stakeholders. but like the prior task force, it was long on 
recommendation and short on implementation beyond public services messages, webinars, 
and  regional  convenings.  it  included  the  standing  stronger  citizenship  awareness 
campaign  and  the  building  welcoming  communities  campaign,  which  consisted  of 
a  series  of  convenings  to  support  local  integration  efforts  around  the  country.  the  us 
small  business  administration  also  developed  a  new  website  to  promote  immigrant 
entrepreneurship (whtfna 2015a). these initiatives provide baby steps forward but fall 
short of the programs and resources required to realize a robust national integration policy 
and infrastructure.

iv. towards a robust and coherent national integration 
policy
what can we learn from past and current efforts? the laissez-faire approach, supplemented 
with  growing  activism  by  non-governmental  actors  and  subnational  governments, 
has certain advantages. in line with arguments for devolution in other policy areas, the 
current system allows for local experimentation and innovation. even though immigration 
increasingly affects many urban, suburban, and rural communities nationwide, different 
locales are home to distinct immigrant and refugee communities that face diverse economic 
conditions,  political  dynamics,  cultural  realities,  and  different  infrastructures  of  civil 
society organizations. in a country as large and diverse as the united states, a one-size-fits-
all approach to immigrant and refugee integration is neither possible nor desirable.

116

journal on migration and human securitylaissez-faire integration, with its emphasis on immigrant agency and the supportive role 
of immigrant-led organizations, also minimizes the risk of paternalism and the idea that 
immigrants culture needs to be erased for successful integration. in the early twentieth 
century, native-born americanizers in government, public schools, business, and private 
organizations  often  underestimated  immigrants  ability  to  devise  their  own  effective 
integration pathways. instead, policies and practices were often culturally imperialistic 
(carlson  1987),  focused  on  indoctrination  in  the american  way  (mcclymer  1978). 
fueled by sentiments of nationalism and nativism, some initiatives denigrated immigrants 
cultures of origin by advancing a one-way assimilation process. today, such a unilateral 
approach  is  no  longer  acceptable  or  desirable. as  the  white  house  task  force  put  it,         
[i]ntegration  is  a  dynamic  two-way  process;  what  immigrants  bring  with  them  helps 
keep our country young, dynamic, and entrepreneurial (whtfna 2015b, 1, 6). moving 
forward, we need to make sure that immigrants, refugees, and their organizations have the 
ability to influence what integration policies look like and how they are implemented. if the 
trump administration shuns integration policy, much can be done at local and state levels, 
in partnership with civil society groups.
under  the  current  system,  immigrant  integration  has  been  happening.  contemporary 
immigrants  learn  english  faster  than  european  immigrants  did  a  century  ago,  and  the 
majority  of  their  children  and  nearly  all  their  grandchildren  speak  only  english  (alba 
2004).  over  time  and  across  generations,  they  improve  their  educational  attainment, 
income, occupational status, and homeownership, and they tend to live in more integrated 
urban and suburban neighborhoods (iceland and scopilliti 2008; kasinitz et al. 2008; park 
and myers 2010; waters and pineau 2016). marriages between immigrants and native-
born individuals sharply increased since 2000 (qian and lichter 2011). finally, since the 
late 1990s, more immigrants have acquired us citizenship at a faster rate than in prior 
decades, although naturalized citizens are still less likely to register and vote than native-
born citizens (lee 2011). it is the case, though, that immigrant integration remains stratified 
by immigrants educational and economic resources, racial inequalities, and legal status, 
barriers preventing many immigrants from participating and contributing as fully as they 
could (portes and rumbaut 2001; telles and ortiz 2008).
indeed, despite important successes, the united states still fails to meet important integration 
benchmarks,  which  comparisons  to  other  western  democracies  make  clear.  immigrant 
naturalization, voter participation, and homeownership rates in the united states trail those 
of canada and several european countries (oecd and eu 2015; vigdor 2011). compared 
to  immigrants  in  many  european  countries,  immigrants  in  the  united  states  are  more 
likely to live in poverty, experience sharper income inequality with native-born residents, 
and experience workplace discrimination on the basis of race, ethnicity, or national origin 
(oecd and eu 2015). data such as these highlight room for improvement. a national, 
coherent integration program can play a vital role in ensuring that immigrants integration 
is faster, easier, and more successful. studies highlighting the relationship between public 
policies and immigrant integration suggest, for example, that helping immigrants learn 
english, acquire citizenship, and secure better jobs enables them to earn higher incomes 
and  thus  contribute  more  fully  to  the  economy  and  their  childrens  future  (e.g.,  biles, 
burstein, and frideres 2008; enchautegui and giannerelli 2015). in canada, government 
integration policies have facilitated immigrants naturalization and encouraged their civic 
and political participation (bloemraad 2006).

117

working together: building successful policy and program partnershipswe thus advocate for a robust, comprehensive national integration policy and infrastructure 
in the united states, one that is vertically integrated to include different levels of government 
and  horizontally  applied  across  public  and  private  sector  actors  and  different  types  of 
immigrant destinations. to that end, the federal government first needs to create a national 
immigrant affairs office, building on the efforts of the bush and obama white house task 
force reports. this new office would need dedicated staff and funding to oversee, develop, 
and coordinate immigrant and refugee integration among federal departments and across 
levels of government. the office would need to be centrally located, such as in the white 
house, with direct lines of communication to the president and his advisors, so that it is 
well-positioned to serve as the interagency liaison to all major federal, state, local, and civil 
society integration stakeholders. its work and activities should be supported and monitored 
by an intergovernmental and cross-sectoral advisory board that includes integration experts 
from different levels of government, different private sector organizations, and different 
immigrant communities from across the country.
besides more centralized coordination of integration efforts from the executive branch, 
existing programs need revisiting and expanding. for example, the dhhs office of refugee 
resettlement should be renamed, and it should expand its activities to include longer-term 
integration goals beyond an eight-month settlement period. the reimagined office should 
work in close partnership with the national immigrant affairs office and highlight, in the 
medium term, three to four integration goals, such as adult english-language instruction, 
naturalization, and small business support, and develop a robust grant program open to civil 
society organizations and subnational governments to provide direct services. congress 
will need to appropriate the necessary resources for these efforts, especially since orr 
already is struggling with budget shortfalls given humanitarian demands. if these programs 
show early successes, the office can expand its programs to address other integration goals 
and immigrant populations, including economic and family-sponsored immigrants.
the office of citizenship in dhs should also expand its activities and set up more direct 
lines of communication with and support to all 50 state governments and other interested 
partners at the county and city levels. it should provide more seed funding  perhaps 
with  complementary  support  from  the  philanthropic  sector    to  state,  county,  and 
city  governments  that  want  to  establish  their  own  immigrant  affairs  offices.  within  its 
mission to engage partners in welcoming immigrants, promoting english, providing civic 
education, and encouraging citizenship, it should work with education officials at all levels 
of government to provide free or low-cost instruction to immigrants wanting to acquire us 
citizenship. it should work with community-based partners to expand the welcome to the 
united states guide for new immigrants, making it accessible in more languages and a 
variety of formats, including informational videos and social media apps.
finally, congress needs to develop immigration reform legislation that includes funding 
for a comprehensive integration policy. the goals and structure of future legislation can 
be modelled on and expanded from already existing legislation on refugee resettlement 
and integration in the immigration and nationality act, as amended by the 1980 refugee 
act and other subsequent amendments. such legislation needs to address the integration 
of all immigrants, including undocumented immigrants, who need to be provided a path 
to legalization and citizenship. it also needs to invite collaboration with non-governmental 

118

journal on migration and human securityentities to leverage the energy, ideas, and work of community-based nonprofits as well as 
the leadership and support of philanthropic, business, educational, faith-based, and other 
institutions.
the federal investments in immigrant and refugee integration we propose are a big ask for 
any administration, but especially for the trump administration. the 10-point immigration 
plan that donald trump campaigned on made no mention of integration and his executive 
orders  in  the  early  days  of  the  administration  clearly  prioritize  enforcement,  increased 
border  control,  and  restricted  admissions  of  refugees  and  immigrants,  making  any 
immediate federal immigrant integration efforts improbable. the four-month suspension 
of the refugee program and the reduction in the number of refugees to be admitted from 
110,000 to 50,000 suggest that orr will be facing difficult times. congress has not yet 
provided a clear or unified response, with democrats determined to undo trumps early 
policies and republicans divided over how to respond.
however,  the  administrations  decision  to  ignore  immigrant  integration  and  possibly 
roll back the minimal federal integration infrastructure currently in place will be to the 
detriment of all. majorities of americans think that immigration is a good thing for the 
country, that undocumented immigrants should have access to a path to citizenship, and 
that immigrants should learn to speak english (gallup poll 2017). the federal government 
should take cues from public sentiment to embrace a more proactive role in immigrant 
integration. when immigrants have more opportunities to learn english, to improve their 
schooling and professional training, to start businesses, and to access citizenship, we all 
benefit. more fully integrated immigrants and refugees boost the economy and strengthen 
community cohesion (e.g., enchautegui and giannerelli 2015; sumption and flamm 2012). 
these are integration outcomes that all americans, regardless of their partisan preferences, 
will support.
if the federal government will not act, cities, states, and civil society organizations must 
continue  to  work  together  to  build  an  integration  infrastructure  from  the  bottom  up. 
indeed, there is room for states, in particular, to take a more pronounced leadership role 
on immigrant integration to complement the growing activism by local governments. we 
must also focus on better knitting state, local, and civil society initiatives together and 
creating more fora for developing and sharing best practices across sectors. there has been 
a sharp increase in public and private interest in and action on immigrant integration issues 
at the local and state levels, especially following the launch of the 2012 deferred action 
for childhood arrivals program (de graauw and gleeson 2016; kerwin et al. 2017). this 
work has been focused, however, on legal and administrative support for a sub-group of 
the immigrant population, not the broader range of integration outcomes so important to 
newcomers and the communities that welcome them. the subnational and cross-sectoral 
capacity  to  facilitate  language  training,  job  placement,  immigrant  entrepreneurship, 
positive  community  relations,  citizenship  acquisition,  and  a  host  of  other  opportunities 
must be strengthened and expanded in the coming years, regardless of how the trump 
administration and congress choose to proceed on immigrant integration.

119

working together: building successful policy and program partnershipsreferences
alba, richard. 2004. language assimilation today: bilingualism persists more than in 
the past, but english still dominates. working paper no. 111. san diego: center 
for comparative immigration studies.

alba,  richard,  and  nancy  foner.  2015.  strangers  no  more:  immigration  and  the 
challenges  of  integration  in  north  america  and  western  europe.  princeton: 
princeton university press. https://doi.org/10.1515/9781400865901. 

biles, john, meyer burstein, and james frideres, eds. 2008. immigration and integration in 
canada in the twenty-first century. kingston: school of policy studies, queens 
university press.

bloemraad, irene. 2006. becoming a citizen: incorporating immigrants and refugees in 

the united states and canada. berkeley: university of california press.

bloemraad, irene, and els de graauw. 2012a. diversity and laissez-faire integration in 
the united states. in diverse nations, diverse responses: approaches to social 
cohesion in immigrant societies, edited by paul spoonley and erin tolley, 35-57. 
montreal and kingston: queens policy studies series, mcgill-queens university 
press.

_____. 2012b. immigrant integration and policy in the united states: a loosely stitched 
patchwork. in international perspectives: integration and inclusion, edited by 
james  frideres  and  john  biles,  205-31.  montreal:  mcgill-queens  university 
press.

bruno, andorra.  2015.  refugee  admissions  and  resettlement  policy.  washington,  dc: 

congressional research service.

_____.  2011.  u.s.  refugee  resettlement  assistance.  washington,  dc:  congressional 

research service.

carlson, robert a. 1987. the americanization syndrome: a quest for conformity. new 

york: st. martin press.

cities for action. 2017. our leaders. http://www.citiesforaction.us/our_leaders. 
de  graauw,  els.  2016a.  making  immigrant  rights  real:  nonprofits  and  the  politics  of 

integration in san francisco. ithaca: cornell university press.

_____. 2016b. city immigrant affairs offices in the united states: taking local control 

of immigrant integration. unpublished chapter; available from the author.

de graauw, els, and shannon gleeson. 2016. how local stakeholders are implementing 
the  deferred  action  for  childhood  arrivals  program.  in  scholars  strategy 
network  key  findings. http://www.scholarsstrategynetwork.org/brief/how-local-
stakeholders-are-implementing-deferred-action-childhood-arrivals-program. 

dhs-tfna (us department of homeland security  task force on new americans). 
2008.  building  an  americanization  movement  for  the  twenty-first  century:  a 

120

journal on migration and human securityreport to the president of the united states from the task force on new americans. 
washington, dc: us government printing office.

dos  (us  department  of  state).  2016.  fy  2017  notice  of  funding  opportunity 
for  reception  and  placement  program  reception  and  placement  program. 
washington, dc: dos, bureau of population, refugees, and migration. http://
www.state.gov/j/prm/funding/fy2017/254909.htm. 

dpc (displaced persons commission). 1950. third semiannual report to the president 
and the congress, february 1, 1950. washington, dc: us government printing 
office.

enchautegui, mara, and linda giannarelli. 2015. the economic impact of naturalization 

on immigrants and cities. washington, dc: urban institute.

fox, cybelle. 2012. three worlds of relief: race, immigration, and the american welfare 
state from the progressive era to the new deal. princeton: princeton university 
press. 

fox, cybelle, and irene bloemraad. 2015. beyond white by law: explaining the gulf 
in  citizenship acquisition  between  mexican  and  european  immigrants,  1930. 
social forces 94(1): 181-208. https://doi.org/10.1093/sf/sov009. 

gallup poll. 2017. immigration. http://www.gallup.com/poll/1660/immigration.aspx. 
gao  (us  government  accountability  office).  2011.  immigrant  integration:  u.s. 
citizenship and immigration services could better assess its grant program. 
gao-12-274.  washington,  dc:  gao.  http://www.gao.gov/products/gao-12-
274. 

haines, david w. 1985. refugees in the united states: a reference handbook. westport: 

greenwood press.

heisler, barbara schmitter. 1992. the future of immigrant incorporation: which models? 
which  concepts?  international  migration  review  26(2):  623-45.  https://doi.
org/10.2307/2547074. 

higham, john. 1994 [1955]. strangers in the land: patterns of american nativism, 1860

1925. new brunswick: rutgers university press.

holman,  philip  a.  1996.  refugee  resettlement  in  the  united  states.  in  refugees  in 
america in the 1990s: a reference handbook, edited by david w. haines, 3-27. 
westport: greenwood press.

iceland,  john,  and  melissa  scopilliti.  2008.  immigrant  residential  segregation  in 
u.s.  metropolitan  areas.  demography  45(1):  79-94.  https://doi.org/10.1353/
dem.2008.0009. 

jimnez, toms r. 2011. immigrants in the united states: how well are they integrating 

into society? washington, dc: migration policy institute.

121

working together: building successful policy and program partnershipskasinitz,  philip,  john  h.  mollenkopf,  mary  c.  waters,  and  jennifer  holdaway.  2008. 
inheriting the city: the children of immigrants come of age. cambridge: harvard 
university press.

kerwin, donald, roberto suro, tess thorman, and daniela alulema. 2017. the daca era 
and the continuous legalization work of the us immigrant-serving community. 
new  york:  center 
for  migration  studies.  http://cmsny.org/publications/
legalization-report. 

king,  desmond.  2000.  making  americans:  immigration,  race,  and  the  origins  of  the 

diverse democracy. cambridge: harvard university press. 

lee, james. 2011. u.s. naturalizations: 2010. washington, dc: department of homeland 

security. www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/statistics/publications/natz_fr_2010.pdf. 

mcclymer, john f. 1978. the federal government and the americanization movement, 

1915-24. prologue: the journal of the national archives 10(1): 23-41.
(new  americans  campaign).  2016.  impact  and  successes.  http://
newamericanscampaign.org/wp-content/uploads/nac_impact_and_success_
june_2016.pdf. 

nac 

nawyn,  stephanie  j.  2011.  i  have  so  many  successful  stories:  framing  social 
citizenship for refugees. citizenship studies 15(6-7): 679-93. https://doi.org/10
.1080/13621025.2011.600072. 

npna  (national  partnership  for  new  americans.  2017).  about  us.  http://

partnershipfornewamericans.org/about-npna. 

oecd (organisation for economic co-operation and development) and eu (european 
union). 2015. indicators of immigrant integration 2015: settling in. paris: oecd 
publishing.

office of citizenship. 2017. about us. https://www.uscis.gov/citizenship/about-us. 
oig (office of the inspector general). 2000. an investigation of the immigration and 
naturalization services citizenship usa initiative. washington, dc: oig, us 
department of justice. https://oig.justice.gov/special/0007/index.htm. 

park,  julie,  and  dowell  myers.  2010.  intergenerational  mobility  in  the  post-1965 
immigration  era:  estimates  by  an  immigration  cohort  method.  demography 
47(2): 369-92. https://doi.org/10.1353/dem.0.0105. 

pham, huyen, and pham hoang van. 2014. measuring the climate for immigrants: a 
state-by-state analysis. in strange neighbors: the role of states in immigration 
policy, edited by carissa byrne hessick and gabriel j. chin, 21-39. new york: 
new york university press.

pnae  (partnership  for  a  new  american  economy).  2017.  about.  http://www.

renewoureconomy.org/about. 

122

journal on migration and human securityportes, alejandro, and rubn g. rumbaut. 2001. legacies: the story of the immigrant 
second  generation.  berkeley/new  york:  university  of  california  press  and 
russell sage foundation press.

qian, zhenchao, and daniel t. lichter. 2011. changing patterns of interracial marriage 
in a multiracial society. journal of marriage and family 73(5): 1065-84. https://
doi.org/10.1111/j.1741-3737.2011.00866.x. 

schmidt, sr., ron. 2007. comparing federal government immigrant settlement policies 
in canada and the united states. american review of canadian studies 37(1): 
103-22. https://doi.org/10.1080/02722010709481802. 

schneider, dorothee. 2001. naturalization and united states citizenship in two periods 
of mass migration: 18941930, 19652000. journal of american ethnic history 
21(1): 50-82. 

sumption, madeleine, and sarah flamm. 2012. the economic value of citizenship for 

immigrants in the united states. washington, dc: migration policy institute.

suro, roberto. 2015. california dreaming: the new dynamism of immigration federalism 
and opportunities for inclusion on a variegated landscape. journal of migration 
and human security 3(1): 1-25. https://doi.org/10.14240/jmhs.v3i1.41. 

telles, edward e., and vilma ortiz. 2008. generations of exclusion: mexican americans, 

assimilation, and race. new york: russell sage foundation press.

vigdor, jacob l. 2011. comparing immigrant assimilation in north america and europe. 

new york: manhattan institute for policy research.

waters, mary c., and marisa gerstein pineau, eds. 2016. the integration of immigrants 

into american society. washington, dc: national academies press.

welcoming america. 2017. our network. https://www.welcomingamerica.org/programs/

our-network#. 

whtfna (white house task force on new americans). 2015a. white house task force 

on new americans: one-year progress report. washington, dc: white house.

.  2015b.  strengthening  communities  by  welcoming  all  residents:  a  federal 
strategic  action  plan  on  immigrant  &  refugee  integration.  washington,  dc: 
white house.

woods, robert a., and albert j. kennedy, eds. 1911. handbook of settlements. new york: 

russell sage foundation.

zucker, norman l., and naomi flink zucker. 1987. the guarded gate: the reality of 

american refugee policy. new york: harcourt brace jovanovich.

123

working together: building successful policy and program partnerships