you are not welcome here 
anymore: restoring support for 
refugee resettlement in the age of 
trump

todd scribner1

executive summary
after descending an escalator of his hotel at central park west on a june 
day in 2015, donald trump ascended a podium and proceeded to accuse 
mexico of sending people that have lots of problems, and theyre bringing 
those  problems  with  us  (sic).  theyre  bringing  drugs.  theyre  bringing 
crime.  theyre  rapists  (time  2015).  it  was  a  moment  that  marked  the 
launch  of  his  bid  for  president  of  the  united  states.  from  that  point 
forward, trump made immigration restriction one of the centerpieces of 
his campaign. paired with an economically populist message, the nativist 
rhetoric shaped a narrative that helped launch him to the white house. his 
effectiveness partly lay in his ability to understand and exploit preexisting 
insecurities, partly in his outsider status, and partly in his willingness to 
tap into apparently widespread public sentiment that is uneasy with, if not 
overtly hostile to, migrants.
this paper will try to make sense of the restrictionist logic that informs 
the trump administrations worldview, alongside some of the underlying 
cultural, philosophical, and political conditions that inspired support for 
trump  by  millions  of  americans.  this  paper  contends  that  the  clash 
of  civilizations  (coc)  paradigm  is  a  useful  lens  to  help  understand  the 
positions that president trump has taken with respect to international 
affairs broadly, and specifically in his approach to migration policy. this 
paradigm, originally coined by the historian bernard lewis but popularized 
by  the  political  theorist  samuel  huntington  (hirsh  2016),  provides  a 
conceptual framework for understanding international relations following 
the end of the cold war. it is a framework that emphasizes the importance 
of culture, rather than political ideology, as the primary fault line along 
which future conflicts will occur. whether trump ever consciously embraced 
such a framework in the early days of his candidacy is doubtful. he has 
been candid about the fact that he has never spent much time reading and 
generally responds to problems on instinct and common sense rather than 
a conceptually defined worldview developed by academics and intellectuals 

1   the opinions expressed herein are those of the author alone and do not necessarily represent the opinions 
or positions of the united states conference of catholic bishops.

 2017 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 5 number 2 (2017): 263-284(fisher  2016).  nevertheless,  during  the  presidential  campaign,  and 
continuing  after  his  victory,  trump  surrounded  himself  with  high-level 
advisers, political appointees, and staff who, if they have nothing else in 
common,  embrace  something  roughly  akin  to  the  clash  of  civilizations 
perspective (ashford 2016).2
the paper will focus primarily on trumps approach to refugee resettlement. 
one might think that refugees would elicit an almost knee-jerk sympathy 
given the tragic circumstances that drove their migration, but perceptions 
of refugees are often tied up with geopolitical considerations and domestic 
political realities. following 9/11, the threat of islamic-inspired terrorism 
emerged as a national security priority. with the onset of the syrian civil 
war and the significant refugee crisis that ensued in its wake, paired with 
some high-profile terrorist attacks in the united states and europe, the 
islamic threat became even more pronounced. 
the  perception  that  islamic-inspired  terrorism  is  a  real  and  imminent 
threat has contributed to a growing antagonism toward the resettlement 
of refugees, and particularly muslims. when viewed through the lens of 
the coc paradigm, victims of persecution can easily be transformed into 
potential threats. insofar as islam is understood as an external and even 
existential threat to the american way life, the admission of these migrants 
and refugees could be deemed a serious threat to national security.
this paper will begin by examining some of trumps campaign promises and 
his efforts to implement them during the early days of his administration. 
although the underlying rationale feeding into the contemporary reaction 
against refugee resettlement is unique in many respects, it is rooted in a 
much longer history that extends back to the world war ii period. it was 
during this period that a more formal effort to admit refugees began, and it 
was over the next half century that the program developed. understanding 
the  historical  backdrop,  particularly  insofar  as  its  development  was 
influenced  by  the  cold  war  context,  will  help  to  clarify  some  of  the 
transitions that influenced the reception of refugees in the decades after 
the fall of the soviet union. 
such an exploration also helps to explain how and why a coc paradigm has 
become ascendant. the decline of the ideologically driven conflict between 
the united states and the soviet union has, according huntingtons thesis, 
been superseded by culturally based conflicts that occur when competing 
civilizations come into contact. the conceptual framework that the coc 
framework embodies meshes well with the cultural and economic dislocation 
felt by millions of trump supporters who are concerned about the continued 
dissolution  of  a  shared  cultural  and  political  heritage.  it  is  important 
to keep in mind that the coc paradigm, as a conceptual framework for 
2   it is worth noting that proponents of the coc worldview are just one bloc within the trump administration, 
albeit at the moment an influential one. other competing blocs (e.g., establishment republicans) are also in 
the mix.

264

journal on migration and human securityunderstanding donald trump and his approach to refugee resettlement 
and migration more broadly, is at its core pre-political; it helps to define 
the cultural matrix that people use to make sense of the world. the policy 
prescriptions that follow from it are more effect than cause. 

trumps campaign promises
beginning with the june announcement of his candidacy, through the republican primary 
and  into  the  general  campaign, trump  honed  his  immigration  restrictionist  bona  fides. 
not only did he promise to crack down on illegal immigration and deport the estimated 
11  million  unauthorized  migrants  living  in  the  united  states  (lobianco  2015),  he  also 
committed to build a wall along the us-mexico border and to make mexico pay for it. he 
took aim at the refugee resettlement system along the way. although perhaps surprising in 
retrospect, in a september 2015 interview with fox news, candidate trump called for an 
increase in the admission of syrian refugees as a humanitarian gesture (bbc news 2015a). 
however, it was not long before he backpedaled and embraced a hardline approach that 
more  closely  mirrored,  and  in  some  respects  surpassed,  the  position  of  his  republican 
opponents. 
just three weeks after promising to bring in more syrian refugees, trump committed to 
sending every syrian refugee admitted into the united states back from where they came 
(bbc 2015b). on november 13, 2015, gunmen and suicide bombers executed an attack 
on a concert hall, a sports stadium, and a series of bars and restaurants in downtown paris, 
killing 130 people. the following week, at a rally in birmingham, alabama, trump called 
for a database of refugees entering the united states from syria and supported efforts to 
surveil several unspecified mosques (haberman 2015).
in the immediate aftermath of the san bernardino attack in december 2015, he called for 
a shutdown on all muslims entering the united states (diamond 2015). several months 
later,  trump  claimed  that  hillary  clinton  supported  a  program  to  admit  hundreds  of 
thousands of refugees from the middle east with no system to vet them, and he vowed to 
use his executive power to stop the admission of muslims and other people from the region 
(schultheis 2016). refugees and other migrants from this part of the world, he said, could 
very easily be a trojan horse for america (ibid.). islamic terrorism was by this point for 
trump an existential threat to the united states; allowing them into the country by choice 
would thus be a critical threat to national security. 

efforts to implement an agenda
upon  becoming  president,  trump  moved  quickly  to  fulfill  some  of  his  election  year 
promises. in the week following the inauguration he issued three different executive orders 
(eo) pertaining to migration. the first two orders came on january 25, 2017 and focused 
on different aspects of the immigration issue. the first looked at border security and issues 
related to the restriction of entry of immigrants,3 and the second focused more explicitly 

3   border security and immigration enforcement improvements, exec. order no. 13767, 82 fed. reg. 8793 
(jan. 25, 2017).

265

you are not welcome here anymoreon  internal  enforcement  and  the  need  to  deal  with  undocumented  migrants  who  were 
established in the united states.4 the beneficiaries of the deferred action for childhood 
arrivals (daca)  program seem to fall outside the administrations broad enforcement 
priorities, at least at this writing. 
more important for our purposes here, the presidents third executive order on migration, 
issued on january 27, focused on his concern that the refugee resettlement program was 
potentially allowing the admission of terrorists into the united states. to minimize this 
possibility,  the  president  called  for  a  reduction  in  the  number  of  refugee  admission  in 
fiscal year (fy) 2017 to 50,000  down from the 110,000 target that president obama 
had established in his presidential determination for fy 2017. among other provisions, 
the order imposed a 120-day halt to the refugee resettlement program (for the purpose 
of reviewing and revising the vetting process), and a 90-day ban on the issuance of any 
visas or refugee resettlement from seven muslim-majority countries. the eo indefinitely 
suspended the admission of syrians.5 
efforts to implement the eo did not run smoothly. reports surfaced that green card holders 
from these banned countries who had traveled overseas were refused entry back into the 
united states. the day after trump signed the order, a dhs spokesperson told reuters that 
the ban would bar green card holders (greenwood 2017). this caused serious disruptions 
at international airports as even lawful permanent residents who sought to return home 
from overseas travel were forbidden from boarding planes bound to the united states. 
potential recipients of special immigrant visas (e.g., individuals who served as interpreters 
for us troops in iraq) were initially forbidden admission. some military officials expressed 
concern about the alienating effect that this decision could have on allies and supporters in 
the region (gibbons-neff 2017).
the following monday, acting attorney general sally yates released a memo to justice 
department  attorneys  ordering  them  not  to  defend  the  executive  order  in  court.  in  the 
memo, she noted that she was responsible for ensuring that the position of the department 
of justice is not only legally defensible, but is informed by our best view of what the law 
is after consideration of all the facts, and to ensure that the positions we take in court 
remain consistent with this institutions solemn obligation to always seek justice and stand 
for what is right (yates 2017). she deemed that some of the provisions in the eo could 
not withstand such scrutiny and thus should not be defended (ibid.). her refusal to enforce 
the refugee ban led to her dismissal several hours later (lawter 2017).
more than 50 lawsuits aimed at trumps executive order were filed by religious groups, 
state attorney generals, and other organizations in the days following its release (wilson 
2017). on february 2, judge james robart, a federal district court judge in seattle, issued 
a temporary restraining order (tro) against several sections of the eo, including the 120-
day admissions pause and the 90-day, seven country ban. less than a week later the 9th 

4   enhancing public safety in the interior of the united states, exec. order no. 13768, 82 fed. reg. 8799 
(jan. 25, 2017). 
5   protecting the nation from foreign terrorist entry into the united states, exec. order no. 13769, 82 fed. 
reg. 8977 (jan. 27, 2017).

266

journal on migration and human securitycircuit court of appeals upheld the tro,6 thus leaving the eo in legal limbo. rather than 
pursuing the legal case through the courts, the trump administration decided to rescind 
and replace the initial order with a new one. the revised order was issued on march 6 and, 
while it maintained the general thrust of the original eo, it contained some changes that 
the administration hoped would pass judicial review. these included the elimination of 
any resettlement preference for religious minorities, the removal of iraq from the banned 
countries list, and the specifying of individuals that the eo did not affect (e.g., foreign 
nationals with valid visas and dual citizens).7 on march 15, district court judge derrick 
watson issued a tro in response to a lawsuit filed by the state of hawaii, which prevented 
the travel ban from taking effect. later that day a maryland judge issued a nationwide 
preliminary injunction on part of the eo (mcgraw 2017). 
given the presidents expansive executive authority to implement immigration policy, it 
would be surprising if president trump does not continue to push a restrictionist agenda 
throughout the rest of his term, and to seek ways to reduce refugee resettlement further. 
what is perhaps more surprising is the extent to which efforts to enact substantive legislative 
changes to migration policy in recent years have failed, given the increasingly tumultuous 
nature of the issue. with respect to humanitarian- based migration policy, for example, the 
provisions laid out in the refugee act of 1980 have remained generally intact for more than 
three decades. this is not an altogether positive assessment given that improvements could 
have been made to the program that would have improved its efficiency and effectiveness 
(scribner  and  brown  2015).  nevertheless,  a  substantial  amount  of  damage  could  also 
have been done if such legislation had significantly altered the united states longstanding 
tradition to resettle refugees. 
why has the program managed to avoid any significant  and long lasting  changes? 
in general, polarization along ideological lines has made it increasingly difficult to find 
any common ground to address some of the fundamental problems facing the immigration 
system (dimock et al. 2014, 64-65). this polarization has been apparent in response to 
refugee resettlement as well, and has led to gridlock and the unwillingness among party 
leadership to raise broader migration-related legislation that could fracture their caucus 
during an election season (magner 2016, 186-87). in addition, the tradition of welcome 
among many americans remains strong, even in the face of the parallel fear and disdain for 
the other, which also has long and deep roots in american life. 
this is not the first time that resettlement has stoked concerns among policymakers and the 
us public. from the mid-1940s, when a more formal refugee resettlement system began 
to take shape in the united states, through the cold war, debates about the resettlement 
system  surfaced. what  risks  did  such  a  system  pose  to  national  security? who  should 
be  resettled  and  what  should  be  the  standards  used  to  determine  their  worthiness  for 
resettlement? finally, what legal authorities should be relied upon (e.g., executive parole 
power or legislation)?

6   state of washington v. trump, no. 17-35105, (9th cir. feb. 9, 2017) (per curiam), http://cdn.ca9.uscourts.
gov/datastore/opinions/2017/02/09/17-35105.pdf.
7   protecting the nation from foreign terrorist entry into the united states, exec. order no. 13780, 82 fed. 
reg. 13209 (march 6, 2017).

267

you are not welcome here anymoreduring the period from about 1945-1989, cold war politics played an important role in the 
growth of the resettlement system. it strongly influenced the way in which policymakers 
engaged  refugees  and  marked  who  was  worthy  and  who  was  not  for  resettlement.  its 
end marked an important transition in international politics and required a rethinking of 
how  refugee  resettlement  fit  within  americas  approach  to  international  relations  and 
humanitarian engagement with the world. understanding the growth of the resettlement 
program  during  the  cold war,  its  impact  on  the  program,  and  the  conceptual  gap  that 
emerged following its end will help to make sense of the contemporary nativist reaction to 
refugee admissions. in short, the end of the cold war left an opening for the emergence of 
a clash of civilizations framework. 

the refugee resettlement system in the united states
the united states refugee resettlement program has its origins in the response to the massive 
number of displaced persons created by world war ii. early efforts by the united states 
to resettle displaced persons were stymied by a few factors. first, the national origins 
act  of1924  complicated  matters  because  refugee  admissions  fell  under  the  purview  of 
the quota system; at the time, there was no legal distinction made between a refugee 
and an immigrant. any effort to resettle displaced persons that went beyond the quota 
for a specific country had to rely on special exemptions by the president or emergency 
legislation  that  would  specifically  provide  for  increased  admissions  (scribner  2013). 
eventually, congress passed a series of laws, beginning with the displaced persons act 
of 1948, that admitted substantial numbers of refugees into the united states. regardless, 
there remained a significant resistance to these types of emergency legislation. 
such  resistance  depended  on  at  least  two  primary  factors.  first,  its  opponents  worried 
that any form of emergency legislation would undermine the practical effect of the quota 
system. this  is  evident  in  the  fact  that  advocacy  groups  that  were  closely  involved  in 
advocating for the passage of such legislation were intentional in their effort to avoid the 
impression that debate over such legislation was in fact a debate over the quota system 
(national catholic resettlement council 1948).8 second, the growing animosity between 
the united states and the soviet union and the onset of the cold war led to concerns that 
the admission of displaced persons would inevitably lead to the admission of communists 
who would seek to undermine america from within.
as early as 1946, senator chapman revercomb (r-wv) contended that refugees from 
eastern europe were ignorant of the american system of government and, as they had 
come from communist countries, likely shared that mind-set. he stated that it would be 
a tragic blunder to bring into our midst those imbued with a communistic line of thought, 
when one of the most important tasks of this government today is to combat and eradicate 
communism from this country (new york times 1946, 4). such a view contrasted with 
president trumans. in a 1947 message to congress, the president emphasized that displaced 
populations in western germany, austria, and italy are not communists and are opposed 
8   on this point, critics of emergency legislation were not entirely in the wrong. the passage of emergency 
legislation in the early 1950s, paired with the expansive use of executive power to parole large groups of 
people into the country during the following decade, undermined the viability of the quota system, even if it 
did not change it in law. 

268

journal on migration and human securityto communism (truman 1948). for this reason, he stated, america ought to open her 
doors to them so that they would not be forced to return to their now communist countries 
of origin (ibid.). similar arguments for and against resettlement resurfaced in the following 
decades, first with the onset of the hungarian refugee crisis and then again with respect to 
the influx of cubans following the rise to power of fidel castro (markowitz 1973, 51-3; 
harvard law review 2001, 907-09).
given the resistance in congress to emergency legislation that would resettle escapees from 
behind the iron curtain, it became almost commonplace for the executive branch to use 
its expansive parole power to provide haven to individuals escaping communist countries. 
one of the reasons for exercising such power was to demonstrate a point: people living 
in communist countries didnt want to be there and by escaping to america would reveal 
the undesirable character of communist countries and the superiority of the west. people 
would vote against the soviet union with their feet, if not by ballot. it was also hoped that 
these efforts would help demonstrate the depravity of the communist bloc countries and 
would help reinforce in the publics mind a national anticommunist sentiment that would 
provide essential support for the continuation of expensive cold war programs (harvard 
law review 2001).
although congressional leadership was long concerned with the ad hoc approach taken by 
the executive branch to admit refugees, for several decades congresss concerns remained 
little more than that. when congress successfully legislated on refugee matters, it generally 
passed legislation that was shaped by the cold war culture. from the passage of the refugee 
relief act of 1953 to the refugee act of 1980, refugees were generally understood in the 
context of the east/west conflict between the soviet union and the united states. the 
immigration and nationality act of 1965, for example, defined a refugee as a person who 
because of persecution or fear of persecution on account of race, religion, or political 
opinion they have fled i) from any communist or communist dominated country, or ii) from 
within any country in the general vicinity of the middle east.9 
it was not until the refugee act of 1980 that the united states formally conformed to the 
definition of a refugee espoused in the 1951 convention related to the status of refugees 
and the 1967 protocol relating to the status of refugees.10 furthermore, the 1980 act 
codified the legal duty of nonrefoulement, which prohibits the return of an individual to 
a country from which their life or freedom would be threatened based on characteristics 
that would qualify the person as a refugee. more broadly, the act standardized the system 
under which refugees were admitted, clarified the objectives of the program, authorized 
assistance programs that would be used to achieve these objectives, and delineated the 
roles and responsibilities of the various federal agencies involved in the process (brown, 
106). nevertheless, even after its passage, the reagan administration applied asylum and 
refugee policy in a way that relied on cold war politics, particularly in relation to central 
americans  fleeing  the  regions  civil  wars  (bon  tempo  2008,  189).  cold  war  politics 
remained a central consideration in refugee resettlement.

9   ina  203(a)(7), 8 u.s.c.  1153(a)(7). 
10   convention relating to the status of refugees (geneva, 28 july 1951) 198 u.n.t.s. 137, entered into 
force 22 april 1954, art 1(a); protocol relating to the status of refugees (new york, 31 jan. 1967) 606 
u.n.t.s. 267, entered into force 4 oct. 1967, art. 1(2); 8 u.s.c.  1521 (1980). 

269

you are not welcome here anymorean important takeaway from the foregoing discussion is the extent to which the conceptual 
framework created by the cold war helped to shape policies and actions related to refugee 
resettlement. presidents from eisenhower to carter used their extensive power to parole for 
victims of communist oppression, so as to highlight the moral and political superiority of 
the united states. until 1980, congress relied on a definition of a refugee that was directly 
informed by the communist threat, a fact that had important implications for people who 
were seeking humanitarian relief. the logic of resettlement was subservient to the foreign 
policy objectives that were central to the cold war  fighting communism and defeating 
the soviet union. 
the end of the cold war created a vacuum, as the conceptual framework that helped to 
define international relations for a half century fell apart. several competing frameworks 
were  developed  by  intellectuals  and  foreign  policy  experts  to  make  sense  of  this  new 
reality. francis fukuyama put forward his end of history theory, which asserted that the 
end of the cold war had led us to the end-point of mankinds ideological evolution and 
the universalization of western liberal democracy as the final form of human government 
(fukuyama 1989, 4). charles krauthammer argued that the united states had entered a 
unipolar moment in which it was the unchallenged superpower. with its newly established 
preeminence, krauthammer argued, the united states was in a position to lay down the 
rules  of  the  world  order  and  should  be  willing  to  enforce  them  (krauthammer  1990). 
samuel huntington, for his part, proposed that the fall of the soviet union had brought to 
the forefront the clash of civilizations: no longer was ideology the key to understanding the 
roots of international conflict, but culture. 
the purpose here is not to determine which conceptual framework most accurately describes 
reality, but which most resonates with those in power and the constituents that function as 
their base of support. there is reason to believe that the huntington thesis is the most 
influential paradigm at work among members of the trump administration; this is a point 
that we will touch on more extensively below. so, what does the clash of civilizations 
entail?
in 1996, samuel huntington authored a book, the central ideas of which were published 
in an earlier article in foreign affairs, which promoted the view that the contemporary 
world is experiencing a series of fundamental conflicts that divide along cultural fault lines 
(huntington 1993; huntington 1996). with the ideological conflict of the cold war in the 
past, a conflict that helped to keep in check cultural divisions from boiling over has moved 
to the forefront. while nation states remain important, they are increasingly eclipsed by 
power groupings made up of existing states that center around shared core cultural values. 
in broader terms, these groupings represent discrete civilizations, which include western, 
confucian (china), islamic, orthodox, and latin american civilization (huntington 1993, 
5). such entities remain ready to defend their interests in the face of challenges from other 
culturally defined groupings (wang 1997, 69-71).
in a post-cold war world, the west finds itself in a weaker position than in earlier decades, 
as other countries have become more willing to play an adversarial role in response to 
the perceived, long-standing cultural, political, and economic dominance by the west of 
other civilizations. with the decline of colonialism, the west has become more isolated 
and other areas of the world have become increasingly modernized  with respect to their 

270

journal on migration and human securitycommunications technology, militarily, economically, and in related matters  and thus 
pose a greater threat or at least an evolving independence. it is what huntington referred 
to as the the west vs. the rest (huntington 1996, 187-206). central to this division is 
the revival of non-western religions, which are the most powerful manifestation of anti-
westernism in non-western society (huntington 1996, 101). not surprisingly, huntington 
posited  that  one  key  area  where  conflict  would  likely  occur  was  between  the  western 
world and the islamic world, because of western arrogance and islamic intolerance 
(huntington 1997, 185) . 
although there are certainly periods and places where christians and muslims coexisted 
peacefully with one another, conflict between the western and islamic worlds is not a new 
one. tensions between these competing religions extends back centuries, almost to the 
origination of islam and its early encounters with christendom. an influential historian of 
islam, bernard lewis, has pointed to the fact that the current tensions between the islamic 
and western worlds are not novel: 

[t]he  struggle  between  these  rival  systems  has  now  lasted  for  some  fourteen 
centuries.  it  began  with  the  advent  of  islam  in  the  seventh  century,  and  has 
continued virtually to the present day. it has consisted of a long series of attacks 
and counterattacks, jihads and crusades, conquests and reconquests.

 (lewis 1990, 49)
huntington holds that, while there has been a makeshift peace that lasted through much of 
the cold war, in its aftermath the long-standing conflict between the western and islamic 
world are again coming to the forefront.11

how did we get here?
the  republican  party  of  the  immediate  post-cold  war  period  under  ronald  reagan 
and george h.w. bush has a very different feel than its present-day iteration under the 
leadership of donald trump. in a recent article for the atlantic, peter beinart wrestles 
with  this  transition  and  points  to  a  fundamental split  that  has  long  been  present  in  the 
republican party, but has only recently broken into the open. two strains of conservative 
thought within the republican party formed a functioning coalition during the cold war. 
the first was comprised of a civilizational form of conservatism, embodied in the likes 
of patrick buchanan and jerry falwell, and an ideological conservatism expressed in the 
thought of someone like senator john mccain and political neoconservatives. the former 
espoused a more culturally oriented perspective rooted in an anglo-saxon and christian 
tradition, which stood up against an atheistic soviet union. the latter was more inclined 
to an enlightenment-oriented liberalism that espoused liberty in the face of a totalitarian 
enemy (beinart 2016).
the end of the cold war eliminated the shared enemy that had originally joined these 
different approaches, although the eventual divorce remained a generally cordial separation 
11   a similar conflict was likely emergent between western civilization and confucian-based societies, as 
the latter became increasingly influential in their respective region. more specifically, china would play an 
increasingly adversarial role to the interests of the united states. 

271

you are not welcome here anymorefor several years. in the aftermath of 9/11, both parties backed george w. bushs war on 
terror, if for different reasons. with the end of the bush presidency and the ascendance of 
obama, the civilizational conservatives became more outspoken in their reaction to islam 
as a wicked religion and not one that aimed at living in peaceful coexistence with the 
west. simultaneously, many of these individuals began to warm to russia and vladimir 
putin, an unthinkable betrayal to the ideological conservatives who viewed russia as an 
authoritarian and an adversary (ibid.). 
the rationale for the civilizational conservatives current support for russia is their view 
of putins russia as christianitys front line against the new civilizational enemy: islam 
(ibid.). from this perspective, putin is popular because he resists the liberal, cosmopolitan 
values that muslims supposedly exploit to undermine the west (ibid.). donald trump 
successfully tapped into these sentiments in several ways. he stoked the popular animosity 
toward islam that had been growing since 9/11, particularly  but not only  in republican 
circles,  and  repeatedly emphasized  the  threat  that  islam  posed  to american  values.  he 
lauded putins leadership style and, during the second presidential debate, said that assad 
and his russian backers were killing isis and that it would be great if we got along with 
russia so that we could fight isis together (s.n. 2016).12 many of his appointees and top-
level advisors have reinforced one or more aspects of this general perspective.
one of the key advisors to trump is stephen bannon, the former executive chairman at 
breitbart news. in his daily radio show, bannon often used rhetoric that reinforced the 
clash of civilizations paradigm, particularly as it pertained to the incompatibility between 
the  western  and  islamic  worlds.13  during  one  interview,  for  example,  he  highlighted 
and  reinforced  the  growing  frustration  in  some  quarters  with  the  federal  governments 
admission of muslim refugees into the united states. he asserted that the west is in the 
middle of an expanding war against islam that will take place on a number fronts, including 
 almost certainly  a new and significant war in the middle east. this threat, he said, is 
compounded by the fact that there is a rot at the center of the judeo-christian west which 
will, presumably make the battle more difficult to win (bannon 2015). several months later, 
when discussing the european migration crisis, he referred to it as a muslim invasion 
that is carrying out a process of civilizational jihad, to which the ruling elites are oblivious 
or even openly courting (bannon 2016c). 
the emphasis on an existing judeo-christian culture and its importance for western life 
is, for bannon, a point of emphasis. in a 2014 speech at a conference held at the vatican, 
which was sponsored by the human dignity institute, he highlighted what he understood 
to be an ongoing process of secularization in the west, and the corrosive role that popular 

12   trumps admiration of putin and his expressed desire for warmer relations with russia is a digression 
from  the  conceptual  framework  promoted  by  huntington  in  his  coc  paradigm.  for  huntington,  russia 
represents an orthodox culture that has for centuries lived in tension with western christianity. 
13   bannon has also emphasized the burgeoning conflict between the united states and china. although it is 
not directly pertinent here, such rhetoric reinforces the clash of civilizations paradigm. huntington stressed 
that a china-us conflict was a very real threat in the coming decades. at one point, for example, bannon 
stated that there is no doubt that the united states and china will go to war in the next five to 10 years. 
drawing the islamic and chinese-threat together, he noted in another show that you have an expansionist 
islam and you have an expansionist china. right? they are motivated. theyre arrogant. theyre on the 
march. and they think the judeo-christian west is on the retreat (bannon 2016a; bannon 2016b).

272

journal on migration and human securityculture has played in this regard.14 when this trend is paired with the reality that we are 
in an outright war against jihadist islamic fascism, and are at the beginning stages of 
a global conflict, the west is seen to be in a disadvantaged position; it has lost one of the 
central roots that gave rise to its greatness and ability to effectively fight back: its christian 
tradition (feder 2014).
the encroaching islamic threat is also at the core of the worldview promoted by sebastian 
gorka, a deputy assistant to the president and former national security editor at breitbart 
news. in his book defeating jihad, gorka (2016) argues that global jihadism is a new form 
of totalitarianism akin to communism or fascism, but perhaps even more dangerous. it is 
global, and thus not bound to a state or clearly defined geographic region, and absolutist 
in its approach. in service to allah, global jihadism has permission to engage in the mass 
murder of infidels or their enslavement. the ultimate purpose, gorka argues, is to bring the 
world under its complete control. thus, confrontation with global jihadists is inevitable. 
the book provides gorkas preliminary plan to develop a strategy how the united states 
should proceed. his commentary also presents an appeal to a christian worldview that will 
be required to engage effectively the battle ahead. 
a third advisor to the president, michael anton, was named in early 2017 as a staff member 
on the national security council. in september 2016, anton published a pseudonymous 
endorsement of trump in an article titled the flight 93 election, a reference to one of 
the hijacked planes on 9/11 in which passengers fought back in effort to retake the plane 
(warren 2017). anton used flight 93 to illustrate the stakes that the american people faced 
in the election  fight back and vote against hillary clinton or die. a vote for trump, he 
argued, might lead to the same result, but at least there would be a chance that we might 
prevail. in short, a hillary clinton presidency is russian roulette with a semi-auto. with 
trump, at least you can spin the cylinder and take your chances (publius decius mus 
2016a). 
in an article published six months earlier under the same pseudonym, anton attempted to 
take a first step at clarifying and systematizing some of the positions outlined by trump in 
his campaign. while the essay is wide ranging, two key points deserve attention  the first 
on islam and the second on mass migration. with respect to islam, publius remarks that 
islam and the modern west are incompatible, and that when we welcome them en masse 
into our country they change us  and not for the better (publius decius mus 2016b). 
furthermore, only an insane society . . . would have increased muslim immigration after 
the september 11th attacks. yet that is exactly what the united states did (ibid.).15
by this view, the threat in the civilizational conflict scenario is not only an external one, 
as disparate civilization orders come into contact, and at times conflict, with each other. 

14   the human dignity institute is think tank established in 2008 by benjamin harnwell for the express 
purpose  of  upholding  an  authentic  understanding  of  human  dignity  rooted  in  the  christian  tradition  and 
against growing secular intolerance toward christians. see http://www.dignitatishumanae.com/. 
15   other examples could be provided of trump administration officials who espouse a manichean vision of 
the conflict between the islamic world and the western one. retired general michael flynn, the short-lived 
national security advisor, for example, expressed at different times his conviction that islamic militancy is 
an existential threat to the west and that sharia law is spreading across the united states. (rosenberg and 
haberman 2016) the foregoing commentary provides a very preliminary investigation into the way that the 
coc paradigm has influenced the development of migration-related policies in the trump administration. 

273

you are not welcome here anymoreinherent to the coc paradigm is the concern that the mass migration of people from one 
civilization to another can bring with it threats to the common order and undermine the 
cultural underpinnings of a society. the migration of muslims to the united states, for 
example, could result in domestic conflicts that emerge along cultural fault lines given the 
different hierarchies of values that each culture presupposes. compounding the problem, 
per this perspective, are the national security concerns that would come along with such 
an influx. 
it is worth noting here as well, however briefly, the application of huntingtons thesis to 
broader issues of migration. in addition to the threat that islam poses, substantial migration 
from latin america to the united states could bring about a notable clash between the 
underlying cultural convictions of these disparate civilizations. language differences that 
accrue  through  large  migration  flows  could  lead  to  a  bifurcated  society  that  undercuts 
any sort of coherent national identity. huntingtons concerns do not apply simply to the 
western/islamic divide but are more comprehensive. this fact is most clearly spelled out 
in one of his latter books, who are we? (huntington 2004a).
this book is in important respects an application of some of his ideas expressed in the clash 
of civilizations and the remaking of a world order to an american context. huntington 
tries to unpack key characteristics of american life, including the english language, its 
anglo-protestant christianity, its embrace of an english concept of the rule of law, and 
its emphasis on the individual (huntington, 2004a, xv-xvii). in the closing decades of the 
twentieth century, he argues, many of these foundational elements of american life have 
come under assault, and multiculturalism has been exalted. the question of whether the 
united states will remain a country with a single national language, and a core anglo-
protestant culture is very much in doubt. as huntington (1997, 204) noted, the issue is 
not whether europe will be islamicized or the united states hispanicized. it is whether 
europe and america will become cleft societies encompassing two distinct and largely 
separate communities from two different civilizations, which turns on how effective host 
countries are at integrating immigrant populations (.
the perceived failure to integrate the large numbers of migrants who have come to the united 
states from all over the world in the past half century has endangered the shared heritage 
that had helped make america great in times past. the willingness to allow admission to 
thousands of muslims who espouse a cultural and religious system that is in contradiction 
to a traditional american culture puts americans at risk. these preoccupations are also 
evident in thinking of the millions of voters who supported trumps presidential campaign 
and are at least, in part, what contributed to his grassroots support. such support is not 
rooted merely in an emotional expression of fear and loathing of migrants and muslims, 
but in a series of pre-political commitments  however flawed they may be under further 
examination  that commit people to a certain way of looking at the world, and thus bias 
them to certain political positions.

the restrictionist impulse in american life
making up 26 percent of the overall electorate and having turned 82 percent in favor of 
donald trump, the white evangelical vote was a crucial factor in the general election. one 

274

journal on migration and human securitycan extrapolate a kind of trinity of factors that fed into evangelical support for trump, and 
which he took advantage of during his campaign: the fear of islam and the assertion that 
muslims pose a national security threat, the cultural insecurities that have emerged among 
many white christian republicans in particular, and economic stagnation. each of these 
factors are worth examining, particularly considering the way that each of them contributed 
to the development of an electorate that was broad enough to help donald trump win the 
presidency.
as of 2015, muslims made up about one percent of the us population (3.3 million), which 
is on track to double by 2050, at which point in time islam is expected to surpass judaism 
as the second largest religious group in the united states (lipka 2015). over half of this 
growth is attributable to migration (mohamed 2016). muslims also comprise an increasing 
percentage of immigrants granted green cards, from about 5 percent in 1995 to 10 percent 
in 2012 (pew research 2013). though still a relatively small population living in the united 
states, the muslim community has received increased scrutiny by a range of organizations 
vying to determine the american publics attitude toward them. 
a february 2017 report released by pew forum provided a thermometer rating for a range 
of religious groups, which measured the warmth or coolness that americans felt in general 
toward  specific  religions.  the  higher  the  number,  the  warmer  the  feelings. as  a  mean 
rating, muslims scored a 48, which was the coolest rating among all religions tested, falling 
shy even of atheism (pew research center 2017). broken down along demographic lines, 
those aged 18-29 expressed the greatest warmth toward muslims, with a mean rating of 58, 
while those aged 65 and older the coolest (44) (ibid.). 
of perhaps the greatest importance here is the support or opposition given by religious 
affiliation  and  partisanship.  white  evangelicals  rated  islam  at  a  chilly  37  degrees,  and 
even members of the white mainline were relatively cool toward muslims (45) (ibid.). 
republicans also expressed a coolness toward islam, providing a mean rating of 39, up 
from 33 just three years ago (ibid.). this contrasted with the opinion held by democrats 
whose mean score was 56 (ibid.). given the significant support provided to donald trump 
by white evangelicals there is reason to believe that his harsh rhetoric pertaining to muslim 
refugees and immigrants might have benefited him. his support among that population 
points to the fact that he struck a chord with these populations, on this issue and likely 
a host of others. given his efforts to appeal to evangelical christians, it is perhaps not 
surprising that he promised to protect christian minorities affected by the crisis in syria 
(burke 2017).
similar partisan divides are evident with respect to the perception of islam: a joint study 
by brookings and the public religion research institute found that while 79 percent of 
republicans, and 83 percent of trump supporters, believe that the basic value system of 
islam is at odds with american values, only 42 percent of democrats thought the same 
way  (jones  et  al.  2016,  44-48).  perhaps  not  surprisingly,  the  same  poll  reports  that  66 
percent of republicans (78% of trump supporters) oppose admitting syrian refugees into 
the united states (ibid.). support for a ban of this sort correlates with concerns related 
to  terrorism;  57  percent  of americans  who  report  being  very  worried  about  terrorism 
favor a ban (ibid.). finally, 64 percent of republicans reported supporting a temporary 
ban on muslim immigration across the board (ibid.). given the heightened sense among 

275

you are not welcome here anymorerepublicans  that  muslims  represent  both  a  national  security  threat  via  terrorism  and  a 
longer term cultural threat due to the competing cultural values that they uphold, it is not 
surprising that trumps nativist rhetoric found substantial support. 
as important as national security, the perceived cultural threat that immigrants pose was 
a second factor in trumps appeal; it is a threat that extends to other types of migrant 
populations. nearly six in 10 trump supporters, and 51 percent of republicans overall, 
reported the opinion that immigrants were changing american society a lot, and of those 
who shared this belief, 74 percent say it has been for the worse (ibid., 50). nearly six in 
10  white americans  express  discomfort  when  they  are  around  immigrants  who  do  not 
speak  english  (ibid.,  13).  many  white  evangelicals  and  conservative  republicans  have 
a  precarious  sense  of  place  in american  culture. alongside  the  perceived  onslaught  of 
secularism and changing morals, the influx of immigrants is yet another blow to their long-
standing preeminence in defining american cultural standards.
in  short,  the  percentage  of  white  evangelicals  who  believe  that america  is  no  longer 
a  christian  nation  jumped  from  48  percent  in  2012  to  59  percent  in  2016  (ibid.). the 
perceived loss of christianity as a defining marker for us identity among white christians 
 who had taken it for granted  could be a singularly disruptive force on the american 
political scene. perhaps most telling is the percentage of republican voters (68%) who 
believe that things have changed for the worse since the 1950s, compared to the percentage 
of democrats who are convinced that things have changed for the better (66%) (ibid.). 
efforts  to  reclaim americas  glorious  past,  while  perhaps  expressive  of  nostalgia,  is  a 
powerful, politically exploitable reservoir. when such decline is viewed not merely as the 
product of an expansive secularism, but also a corrosive foreign influence brought about 
by an influx of migrants who were formed in a different cultural setting, the likelihood that 
nativism will emerge increases substantially.16 robert jones has referred to this process of 
dissolution as signifying the end of white christian america (jones 2016). 
as a part of this worldview, not only do muslims pose an external national security threat 
vis--vis terrorism, but an internal one insofar as they threaten the cultural and political 
foundations that have given the united states its distinctive character. this is a story as old 
as america. migrants have often been deemed threats to the existing political and social 
system. in the late nineteenth century and early decades of the twentieth century, the fear 
was that a theocracy would be created as catholics entered in large numbers and fomented 
revolution. by the mid-twentieth century, restrictionist sentiment hinged partially on anti-
semitism, and the overlapping concern that many jews admitted from europe might harbor 
communist  sympathies.  in  recent  decades,  the  threat  of  islamic-inspired  terrorism  has 
become an overriding concern for many americans. 
beyond the cultural and political threat, the economic threat that migrants pose also plays an 
important role. tucked in between terrorism and immigration as the first and third priorities 
for white evangelicals when casting a vote for president in 2016 was the economy. the 
great recession, which began in december 2007, took a significant toll on communities 
across the nation. the average income for evangelical christians today remains 1.6 percent 

16   per the brookings study, 83 percent of trump supporters (and 74% of republican voters) asserted that 
america needed to be protected against foreign influences that were doing america harm (ibid.).

276

journal on migration and human securitylower than in 2007, and 2.4 percent lower than the high reached in the 1990s. while white 
evangelicals still fare better than their non-white evangelical counterparts, many have failed 
to return to their previous standard of living and feel a sense of having been left behind. 
donald trumps promise to make america great again played into these insecurities by 
promising that he would take responsibility for eliminating them (reynaud 2017).
perhaps not surprisingly, a large majority of trump supporters (80%) thought of immigrants 
as burdens on the economy because they take americans jobs, healthcare, and housing 
(jones et al. 2016, 46-47). taken together, concerns related to national security, cultural 
dissolution, and economic insecurity contribute to a sensibility that can very easily become 
enmeshed in a narrative that is nativist and exclusionary. countering this worldview will 
require proponents of migration and refugee resettlement to engage these issues on a variety 
of levels, through direct advocacy with elected officials and engagement with everyday 
americans who are concerned about the danger that migrants pose to america. 

restoring support for refugee resettlement
critics of the trump administration  as well as some supporters  who are supportive 
of  humanitarian  migration  into  the  united  states  are  understandably  concerned  with 
some of the policies he tried to implement during his early weeks in office. to take one 
example,  his  proposed  reduction  in  the  number  of  refugees  to  50,000  during  fy  2017 
will  likely  remain  the  standard  for  the  foreseeable  future.  this  is  a  reduction  from  an 
approximately 85,000 resettled in fy 2016 and down further from the proposed 110,000 
that then president obama hoped to resettle in fy 2017. taking fy 2016 as the marker, 
over the course of the next four years, this reduction would total approximately 140,000 
people who might otherwise be resettled but are stuck in refugee camps and urban refugee 
situations around the world. compare this to the fact that during calendar year 2016, the 
rest of the world resettled a total of about 41,000 refugees (unhcr 2017).17 moreover, 
refugee resettlement complements other permanent solutions for refugees and can be used 
to secure greater integration opportunities for refugees in host communities abroad. for 
these reasons, resettlement reductions have consequences that extend well beyond the lives 
of those eligible for resettlement.
the difference between the number proposed by obama for fy16 and the number trump 
has proposed for fy17 is roughly equivalent to the number of refugees resettled in every 
other country. and, these announced reductions come despite the record 65 million forcibly 
displaced people in the world, a number that includes more than 21 million refugees (ibid.). 
this fact makes any further reduction in the number of refugees resettled all the more 
significant, and points to the need to expand the number resettled so as to better respond to 
a need that is difficult to ignore. how do we do that?

17   to be fair, with the onset of the syrian refugee crisis, many countries, including some notable examples 
in europe, have been far more open to the admission of asylum seekers than has been the united states. as 
much as the united states might like to applaud itself for the number of refugees that it has traditionally 
admitted compared to other countries, its reticence to provide an equally generous asylum policy is worth 
noting. competing approaches to the admission of asylum seekers versus the admission of refugees through 
the more formalized resettlement system should be examined more closely. 

277

you are not welcome here anymorethere is no doubt that effective advocacy is an important first step in this process, if for no 
other reason than to resist the further legislative expansion of restrictionist sentiment. failure 
to advocate in favor of ones own community or values leaves the door open for others to 
advocate on your behalf, and not always in your favor. first and foremost, it is important to 
advocate for generous refugee admissions program that provides funding adequate to meet 
the  needs  involved  in  the  resettlement  process. this  also  includes  maintaining  suitable 
foreign aid funding; any significant cuts to organizations like the united nations high 
commissioner for refugees by the united states risks seriously disrupting the ability of 
unhcr to screen potential refugees and to provide support and care for individuals who 
are stuck in refugee-like situations. richard gowan, an expert at the european council 
on  foreign  relations,  noted  that  in  2016,  the  united  states  contributed  $1.5  billion  of 
the $4 billion unhcr budget. cutting this contribution would leave a gaping hole that 
other big donors would struggle to fill (lynch 2017). it will also be important to help 
mobilize minority communities and urge them to be more politically active so that they 
can help to shape political decision making on the state and national level (young 2017). 
finally, it is crucial that advocates urge administrators of the refugee program to remain 
faithful to its original, nondiscriminatory purpose of protecting the persecuted, including 
victims of religious persecution, at a time when large numbers of americans mistakenly 
view muslims as a threat to their culture and security. 
in addition to direct advocacy with lawmakers on capitol hill and the administration, it 
is important that proponents of refugee resettlement engage in grassroots organizing and 
educational efforts in local communities. this could include efforts to publicize the tangible 
benefits that refugees and migrants make to their local communities, and highlight the fiscal 
consequences of their exclusion. promoting integration on the local level will also prove 
helpful to counteract criticisms that migrant communities self-segregate and demonstrate 
an indifference or aversion to becoming active participants in their communities. this will 
require that religious institutions, immigration advocates, nonprofits and other organizations 
better understand what contributes to effective integration and how local organizations are 
succeeding, or failing, in this regard (kerwin and barron 2017). getting a better grasp on 
these various facets and disseminating them publicly via various media and other outlets 
will be of assistance in the advocacy efforts and, hopefully, help to alleviate some of the 
tensions that emerge on the local level between native and refugee populations. 
while the role and responsibility of advocates to respond to attacks on the resettlement 
system is crucial, policymakers have the primary responsibility to approach this issue in 
a clearheaded and responsible manner. in particular, they ought to refrain from exploiting 
existing cultural fears of religious or other minority groups who are admitted into the united 
states via the refugee resettlement system. given the positions of power that elected officials 
occupy, it would be particularly unfortunate if they were to mischaracterize the intentions 
and aspirations of refugee groups for political ends. instead, they should recognize the 
generally bipartisan support that the refugee resettlement system has held and, in doing so, 
work more closely together to ensure that the system is further strengthened and supported, 
while ensuring that national security concerns are addressed.
it is also important to recall that culture  broadly understood  will play a preeminent 
role in the promotion and establishment of policy, whether in the field of migration, poverty, 

278

journal on migration and human securityfamily,  or  some  other  arenas.  setting  legislative  agendas,  promoting  communication 
strategies,  developing  talking  points,  and  coordinating  advocacy  efforts  are  important 
aspects of the policymaking process, but more crucial still is the importance of shaping 
a culture so that it is conducive to  in this instance  a more generous approach to 
refugees and migrants. 
the centrality of culture in the legislative process might very well require that institutions 
that are interested in shaping legislation to the benefit of vulnerable migrant populations 
rethink  their  strategies. this  could  include  less  emphasis  on  advocacy  efforts  aimed  at 
congress and the administration, and more emphasis on engaging people that inhabit rural 
america, small towns, and big cities across the country. cultural and personal formation 
would thus take center stage, while lobbying efforts and grassroots mobilization in favor 
of a specific legislative agenda would take a secondary  albeit important  place in the 
process.18 an effort to rethink the fundamental narratives that guide our decision making 
and  thus  our  self-understanding  as  a  nation,  should  become  the  priority  in  the  public 
engagement of civic associations, faith communities, and other organizations interested in 
the public square. there are a variety of academically oriented resources and publications 
that have focused on these types of issues, but it is important that more work be done to 
engage the wider community on fundamental questions of national identity.
how do people understand the world, the nation, and their place in them? what kinds of 
paradigms and conceptual frameworks are various interest groups and individuals using to 
make sense of their lives and the situation in which they find themselves? who is promoting 
these conceptual frameworks and for what end? are there alternative ways at looking at the 
world, what are they, and how can they be more effectively promoted in the public square? 
the cultural underpinnings  the pre-political conditions  will continue to shape the 
context in which specific legislative proposals and administrative actions will be deemed 
viable, elections will be won and lost, and policies will be shaped that affect the lives of 
millions, including refugees. 
 

