working together: building 
successful policy and program 
partnerships for immigrant 
integration1

els de graauw 
baruch college, the city university of new york

irene bloemraad 
university of california, berkeley

executive summary
supporting  and  investing  in  the  integration  of  immigrants  and  their 
children  is  critically  important  to  us  society.  successful  integration 
contributes to the nations economic vitality, its civic and political health, 
and its cultural diversity. but although the united states has a good track 
record  on  immigrant  integration,  outcomes  could  be  better.  a  national, 
coherent  immigrant  integration  policy  infrastructure  is  needed.  this 
infrastructure  can  build  on  long-standing  partnerships  between  civil 
society  and  us  public  institutions.  such  partnerships,  advanced  under 
republican- and democratic-led administrations, were initially established 
to  facilitate  european  immigrants  integration  in  large  american  cities, 
and later extended to help refugees fleeing religious persecution and war. 
in the twenty-first century, we must expand this foundation by drawing on 
the growing activism by cities and states, new civil society initiatives, and 
public-private partnerships that span the country.
a  robust  national  integration  policy  infrastructure  must  be  vertically 
integrated  to  include  different  levels  of  government  and  horizontally 
applied  across  public  and  private  sector  actors  and  different  types  of 
immigrant  destinations.  the  resultant  policy  should  leverage  public-
private partnerships, drawing on the energy, ideas, and work of community-
based  nonprofit  organizations  as  well  as  the  leadership  and  support  of 
philanthropy, business, education, faith-based, and other institutions. a 
new coordinating office to facilitate interagency cooperation is needed in 
the executive branch; the mandate and programs of the office of refugee 
resettlement need to be secured and where possible expanded; the outreach 
and  coordinating  role  of  the  office  of  citizenship  needs  to  be  extended, 
including  through  a  more  robust  grant  program  to  community-based 

1   we are indebted to donald kerwin and philip wolgin for helpful feedback. the authors are equal co-
authors.

 2017 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 5 number 1 (2017): 105-123organizations; and congress needs to develop legislation and appropriate 
funding for a comprehensive integration policy addressed to all, and not 
just humanitarian immigrants.
the federal investments in immigrant and refugee integration we propose 
are a big ask for any administration; they seem especially unlikely under 
the trump administration, whose efforts focus on enforcement and border 
control, targeting undocumented and legal immigrants alike. yet immigrant 
integration is not and should not be a partisan issue. federal politicians 
across the political spectrum need to realize, as many local officials and 
a  large  segment  of  the  public  already  do,  that  successful  immigrant 
integration  is  a  win-win  for  everybody.  when  immigrants  have  more 
opportunities to learn english, to improve their schooling and professional 
training, to start businesses, and to access citizenship, we all benefit. a 
majority  of  the  american  public  supports  immigrant  integration,  from 
proposals for learning english to a path to citizenship for undocumented 
immigrants.  local  and  state  governments  are  setting  up  initiatives  to 
promote integration. if the federal government will not act, cities, states, 
and civil society organizations must continue to work together to build an 
integration infrastructure from the bottom up. 

i. introduction
the  united  states  welcomes  hundreds  of  thousands  of  newcomers  every  year.  yet  it 
lacks a national, coherent immigrant integration policy. officials in the us government 
accountability office note that no single federal entity has been designated to lead the 
creation, implementation, and coordination of a national immigrant integration capability 
(gao 2011, 25). academics have characterized the american approach as laissez-faire 
integration  or  a  patchwork  of  policies  (bloemraad  2006;  bloemraad  and  de  graauw 
2012a-b; de graauw 2016a; heisler 1992; jimnez 2011; schmidt, sr. 2007). in the media, 
whether today or a century ago, integration is represented by horatio alger-type stories 
of poor immigrants achieving the american dream through individual hard work and the 
support of family and friends. the twentieth-century andrew carnegie, a poor scottish 
immigrant  turned  steel  industry  tycoon  and  philanthropist,  is  the  equivalent  of  todays 
silicon valley giant sergey brin, the google co-founder born in russia, or entrepreneurs 
do won and jin sook, the korean-born husband and wife team who founded the fashion 
chain forever 21 with $11,000 and high school educations. in these narratives of immigrant 
integration, the role of government is largely absent.
such a laissez-faire approach is short-sighted in its depiction of the past and, critically, as a 
roadmap for the future. laissez-faire narratives do not acknowledge that for over a century 
governmental actors in the united states have played a role in immigrant integration. these 
efforts have expanded notably over the last decade, especially at the local and state levels, 
producing diverse partnerships between civil society and federal, state, county, and local 
governments around immigrant settlement. the failure to build on these foundations means 
that immigrant integration outcomes will fall short of what they could be, to the detriment 

106

journal on migration and human securityof the nation as a whole. in many respects the united states can be proud of its record of 
incorporating newcomers, as a recent national academy of sciences report makes clear 
(waters and pineau 2016), but comparisons with other countries show that benchmarks fall 
short at times, especially around naturalization, economic self-sufficiency, and residential 
integration (alba and foner 2015; oecd and eu 2015; vigdor 2011). a more deliberate 
federal role in a comprehensive immigrant integration strategy is critical for improving 
immigrants societal integration.
we argue for the development of an integrated policy. such a policy should apply nationally 
and link to current city, county, and state settlement infrastructures and initiatives, as well as 
to existing civil society efforts. where local integration initiatives do not yet exist, the new 
federal policy would provide goals, best practices, and funding to establish local programs 
and support infrastructures. building on successes in refugee resettlement and the growing 
number  of  city  and  state  immigrant  affairs  offices,  the  resultant  policy  would  leverage 
public-private partnerships, drawing on the energy, ideas, and work of community-based 
nonprofits  as  well  as  the  leadership  and  support  of  philanthropy,  business,  education, 
faith-based, and other institutions. such partnerships would allow for local innovation and 
tailoring programs to the unique needs of a particular community, while a national scope 
would ensure baseline settlement support across the country as part of a cohesive vision for 
successful immigrant and refugee integration in the united states.
in what follows, we first discuss immigrant integration in the twentieth century, highlighting 
historic examples of public-private partnerships to build on today. we next outline immigrant 
integration efforts in the twenty-first century, highlighting the increased activism of city 
and  state  governments,  the  creation  of  new  civil  society  initiatives  and  public-private 
partnerships, and recent federal interest in immigrant integration. we conclude by making 
the case for a more robust national integration policy infrastructure, one that is vertically 
integrated to include different levels of government and horizontally applied across public 
and private sector actors and different types of immigrant destinations. by working together 
with federal leadership and support, we can build nationwide partnerships for immigrant 
integration  that  lay  the  groundwork  for  many  success  stories,  for  newcomers  and  the 
communities in which they reside.

ii.  twentieth  century  integration:  laissez-faire  with 
public-private partnerships
immigrant integration during  the twentieth century is  often portrayed as  a  laissez-faire 
process  relying  primarily  on  grassroots  initiative,  not  public  planning  or  government 
intervention (e.g., jimnez 2011; schmidt, sr. 2007). immigrants became part of american 
society by using their own resources and ingenuity, the help of family and friends, and  
on occasion  the assistance of local community organizations. there is much truth in 
these narratives. immigrants could count on an expanding industrial economy and a robust 
public education system to help them and their children secure economic mobility and a 
comfortable middle-class lifestyle, but government was otherwise not proactive in creating 
or promoting integration pathways. just as the invisible hand of laissez-faire capitalism 
was assumed to produce a self-regulated market based on the individual actions of many 
people, the individual actions of immigrants eager for a better life in the united states were 

107

working together: building successful policy and program partnershipsassumed to function as the invisible hand in immigrants societal integration (bloemraad 
and de graauw 2012a).

a. 

immigrant  organizations,  settlement  houses,  and 

americanization efforts: organized assistance before world war ii
laissez-faire  narratives  ignore,  however,  longstanding  american  partnerships  between 
civil society and public institutions. within immigrant communities, immigrant-run private 
charities  and  voluntary  organizations  have  long  helped  compatriots  get  a  job,  secure 
business  loans,  encourage  citizenship,  or  provide  food,  clothing,  and  funeral  benefits 
during tough times. starting in the late nineteenth century, us-born social reformers also 
became involved, setting up settlement houses. first established in new york, chicago, 
and boston, by 1911, 413 such institutions were tallied across 32 states, the district of 
columbia, and the hawaiian islands (woods and kennedy 1911, vi). usually funded by 
religious groups, charitable associations, and wealthy residents, settlement houses targeted 
the poor, including many immigrants in large american cities in the midwest and northeast. 
these organizations, within and outside immigrant communities, built a tradition of civil 
society engagement that continues to this day (de graauw 2016a).
as settlement houses spread, so did the americanization movement. it brought governments 
from the local to federal levels into integration efforts, often in partnership with charitable 
groups,  businesses,  social  reformers,  and  local  school  boards.  their  efforts  were  often 
paternalistic, nativist, and coercive (higham 1994 [1955]), but at times could be benign 
and  supportive.  rather  than  laissez-faire,  public  institutions  engaged  with  local  and 
immigrant partners. for example, the us board of education established a division of 
immigrant education that funded english language, literacy, and civics instruction, while 
the  us  bureau  of  naturalization  partnered  with  school  officials  to  identify  adults  who 
might benefit from citizenship classes (king 2000, 87-120; schneider 2001).
some early government initiatives came with resources. over four-fifths of state legislatures 
in the northeast and midwest passed legislation with funding support for adult english and 
citizenship classes in the interwar period; in 1927-1928, these states allocated, on average, 
$1.42 per alien resident for naturalization education (fox 2012; fox and bloemraad 2015, 
193). at about $19.50 per noncitizen in 2016 dollars, today this would be the equivalent of 
the federal government spending over $440 million on the almost 22.6 million noncitizens 
living  in  the  country.  in  2016,  however,  the  us  citizenship  and  immigration  services 
(uscis) awarded less than $10 million in grants to 46 organizations through the uscis 
citizenship and integration grant program.2

b. post-war partnerships for successful integration: the case of 

refugee resettlement
refugee resettlement offers another public-private collaborative framework for integration, 
one  that  built  on  pre-war  organizations.  the  oldest  voluntary  agency  still  engaged  in 
2    see  https://www.uscis.gov/about-us/citizenship-and-integration-grant-program.  data  on  the  noncitizen 
population of the united states is from the 2015 american community survey, one-year estimates, available 
at https://factfinder.census.gov.

108

journal on migration and human securityrefugee resettlement today is the hebrew immigrant aid society, founded in new york 
city in 1881 to assist jews fleeing pogroms in russia and eastern europe. other private 
resettlement  organizations,  with  religious  or  secular  roots,  sprung  up  in  the  1930s  and 
1940s as europe descended into fascism, communist purges, and war (zucker and zucker 
1987). working overseas and in the united states, these groups became major players in 
refugee resettlement after world war ii, settling hundreds of thousands of people largely 
using private resources (holman 1996). their efforts led the federal displaced persons 
committee to speak approvingly of the religious and welfare organizations through whose 
cooperative activities so many of the displaced persons have come to the united states 
and which have rendered a most commendable service in partnership with displaced 
persons commissions or committees in 33 us states (dpc 1950, 22, 25).
after world war ii, the relationship between voluntary agencies and government gradually 
became more permanent, including professionalized services by nonprofits and increased 
government funding and oversight. after thousands of hungarian refugees arrived in 1956, 
the federal government offered voluntary agencies $40 per person to defray transportation 
costs (holman 1996, 6). in 1959, the influx of cuban emigrs in miami severely strained 
local, county, and state capacity to secure housing, jobs, and schools. in response, congress 
passed the migration and refugee assistance act in 1962, the first federal law authorizing 
and financing domestic refugee assistance, although it restricted support to cubans in miami 
(holman 1996). however, when the fall of saigon sent 130,000 southeast asian refugees 
to the united states, congress drew on similar authority and logic to pass the indochina 
migration  and  refugee assistance act  of  1975.  it  established  a  program  giving  states 
federal funds to provide medical assistance and financial support to needy refugees and to 
finance integration programs such as english language and employment training. the 1976 
indochinese refugee children assistance act reimbursed states for education and special 
language instruction costs.  unlike the prior program for  cubans,  these initiatives were 
national. another wave of organizations, often termed mutual assistance associations, were 
founded to provide linguistically and culturally appropriate services in refugees places of 
settlement. in the late 1970s, congress reauthorized federal resettlement assistance, while 
oversight of funding and programs moved around among federal agencies.
in  1980,  congress  enacted  the  refugee act  to  end  the  ad  hoc,  patchwork  approach  to 
refugee admissions and settlement. in addition to providing a uniform procedure for refugee 
admissions, the act permanently authorized federal assistance to promote refugees self-
sufficiency and established the office of refugee resettlement (orr) in the us department 
of health and human services (dhhs). an early assessment concluded that calling this 
a single program would be a misnomer, as it was more accurately a complex web of 
federal government, voluntary agency, and state and local government roles that provide 
the overall framework for resettlement efforts (haines 1985, 7). despite the challenges of 
a policy and programmatic web developed in fits and starts, it nonetheless has served as a 
valuable safety net from which refugees could establish themselves, a support structure not 
available to economic or family-sponsored migrants facing similar integration challenges.
today, the web of federal, voluntary sector, state and local partnerships around refugee 
resettlement continues, with a focus on getting refugees to economic self-sufficiency as soon 
as possible. the us department of states (doss) bureau of population, refugees, and 

109

working together: building successful policy and program partnershipsmigration funds cooperative agreements with a range of public and private organizations 
to facilitate initial settlement through the us reception and placement program. in 2016, 
a refugee helped by one of the nine contracted voluntary agencies would be greeted at 
the  airport  and  brought  to  a  furnished  residence  stocked  with  some  clothes,  culturally 
appropriate foods, and other necessities. someone from the agency would provide referral 
services and practical assistance, from applying for a social security card and registering 
children for school to helping arrange medical appointments, enroll in english language 
classes,  find  employment,  or  use  local  public  transportation.  under  the  2017  program, 
dos provides agencies with $2,025 per refugee, amounts often supplemented with agency 
contributions from other public and private sources since grants are often inadequate to 
cover costs fully (dos 2016).
a second set of programs administered by orr provides transitional settlement assistance 
to refugees and other designated humanitarian groups.3 orr programs provide formula 
grants to states to provide refugees with cash and medical assistance, and offer grants to a 
range of government and voluntary sector partners to fund social and employment services. 
partners can include public agencies, faith-based or secular nonprofits, and ethnic-specific 
mutual  assistance  associations,  many  of  which  also  contribute  matching  or  in-kind 
resources. in the 2015 fiscal year, congress voted $1,559,884,000 in appropriations for 
orr programs, much of it for cash and medical assistance (bruno 2015, 8). when the 
refugee assistance program was first established in 1980, federal assistance was available 
for up to 36 months. since 1991, refugees are funded for just eight months, often too short 
a period to secure economic self-sufficiency for refugees with limited education or arriving 
with physical or mental trauma (bruno 2011; nawyn 2011).

c. a threadbare patchwork for other immigrants

the policy and programmatic web of refugee resettlement faces challenges in integrating 
humanitarian migrants, especially as orrs capacity was stretched serving unaccompanied 
minors from central america. however, the refugee infrastructure is still more cohesive 
and extensive than the threadbare, loose patchwork of integration initiatives in place for 
other immigrants. most non-refugee immigrants come to the united states under family 
reunification provisions of the 1965 immigration and nationality act. these newcomers 
can call on their families for initial settlement support, but individual families can only 
do so much. more sustained public support is necessary for optimal long-term integration 
outcomes.
we might expect the main federal agency responsible for immigration to provide leadership 
on integration. but throughout much of the post-wwii period, the us immigration and 
naturalization service (ins) did not engage in proactive immigrant integration work. at 
most,  it  oversaw  the  administration  and  adjudication  of  naturalization,  which  included 
providing public information on how to become a citizen. the ins generally assumed 
that  those  granted  permanent  residence  through  employment  p