moving beyond comprehensive 
immigration reform and trump: 
principles, interests, and policies 
to guide long-term reform of the 
us immigration system

donald kerwin 
center for migration studies

executive summary
this paper introduces a special collection of 15 papers that chart a course 
for long-term reform of the us immigration system. the papers look beyond 
recent legislative debates and the current era of rising nationalism and 
restrictionism  to  outline  the  elements  of  a  forward-looking  immigration 
policy that would serve the nations interests, honor its liberal democratic 
ideals, promote the full participation of immigrants in the nations life, and 
exploit the opportunities offered by the increasingly interdependent world. 
this paper highlights several overarching themes from the collection, as 
well as dozens of proposals for reform. together, the papers in the collection 
make the case that: 
  immigration  policymaking  should  be  embedded  in  a  larger  set  of 
partnerships, processes, and commitments that respond to the conditions 
that force persons to migrate. 

  the  us  immigration  system  should  reflect  liberal  democratic  values 

and an inclusive vision of national identity.

  it  is incumbent on policy and opinion makers to publicize the broad 

national interests served by us immigration policies. 

  policymakers  should,  in  turn,  evaluate  and  adjust  us  immigration 

policies based on their success in furthering the nations interests. 

  the united states should prioritize the gathering and dissemination of 
the best available evidence on migration and on the nations migration-
related needs and programs, and should use this information to respond 
flexibly to changing migration patterns and new economic developments. 
  immigrant  integration  strengthens  communities  and  represents  an 

important, overarching metric for us immigration policies. 

 2017 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 5 number 3 (2017): 541-576  the successful integration of the united states 43 million foreign-born 

residents and their progeny should be a national priority.

  an  immigration  federalism  agenda  should  prioritize  cooperation  on 

shared federal, state, and local priorities. 

  an  immigration  federalism  agenda  should  recognize  the  federal 
governments enforcement obligations; the interests of local communities 
in  the  safety,  well-being  and  participation  of  their  residents;  the 
importance of federal leadership in resolving the challenges posed by the 
us undocumented population; and the need for civil society institutions 
to serve as mediators of immigrant integration.

  immigration reform should be coupled with strong, well-enforced labor 
standards in order to promote fair wages and safe and healthy working 
conditions for all us workers.

  fairness and due process should characterize us admission, custody, 

and removal decisions.

  family unity should remain a central goal of us immigration policy 

and a pillar of the us immigration system.

  the united states should seek to craft win-win immigration policies 

that serve its own interests and that benefit migrant-sending states. 

  us  immigration  law  and  policy  should  be  coherent  and  consistent, 
and  the  united  states  should  create  legal  migration  opportunities 
for persons uprooted by us foreign interventions, trade policies, and 
immigration laws.  

  the united states should reduce the size of its undocumented population 
through a substantial legalization program and seek to ensure that this 
population never again approximates its current size.

introduction
in  july  2016,  the  center  for  migration  studies  of  new  york  (cms)  initiated  its  us 
immigration reform project to provide an evidence base, vision, and policy framework to 
guide long-term reform of the us immigration system.1 an advisory group conceptualized 
the project and helped to identify themes and issues for a special collection of papers.2 this 
1   in this paper, the term us immigration system encompasses the us refugee protection system. 
2   the group included edward alden, bernard l. schwartz senior fellow, council on foreign relations; 
kevin appleby, senior director of international migration policy, center for migration studies (cms), who 
also served as a special co-editor of the collection; michael doyle, university professor and director, columbia 
global policy initiative, columbia university; joanna dreby, associate professor, university at albany, state 
university of new york; douglas gurak, professor emeritus, cornell university and editor, international 
migration review; jacqueline hagan, professor of sociology, the university of north carolina at chapel 
hill; josiah heyman, director, center for interamerican and border studies, professor of anthropology and 
endowed professor of border trade issues, the university of texas at el paso; donald kerwin, executive 

542

journal on migration and human securityintroduction to the collection will highlight the findings, themes, and policy ideas from 15 
papers published in cmss journal on migration and human security (jmhs) and as cms 
essays. 
the collection does not constitute a blue ribbon commission report, or an expert consensus 
on immigration reform. instead, the papers outline important aspects of a forward-looking 
immigration policy that would serve the nations interests, honor its liberal democratic 
ideals, promote the full participation of immigrants in the nations life, and exploit the 
opportunities offered by an increasingly interdependent world.
this paper discusses the papers in this collection, while also drawing on select papers from 
jmhs special collections on the us refugee protection system on the 35th anniversary of 
the refugee act of 19803; the us immigration enforcement system on the 20th anniversary 
of the illegal immigrant reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 (iirira)4; and 
the global refugee protection system.5 
the papers in this collection cover a large number of topics, including the conditions driving 
migration, the national interests served by us immigration policies, nationalism, nativism, 
director, cms; ellen percy kraly, william r. kenan, jr. professor of geography and environmental studies, 
colgate  university;  tara  magner,  director  of  the  chicago  commitment,  the  john  d.  and  catherine  t. 
macarthur  foundation;  susan  martin,  donald  g.  herzberg  professor  emerita  of  international  migration, 
georgetown university; cecilia menjivar, foundation distinguished professor, the university of kansas; 
tyler moran (serving in personal capacity); cristina rodrguez, leighton homer surbeck professor of law, 
yale law school; emily ryo, assistant professor of law and sociology, university of southern california 
gould school of law; todd scribner, education outreach coordinator, migration and refugee services, united 
states conference of catholic bishops; lynn shotwell, executive director, council for global immigration; 
roberto suro, professor of journalism at the annenberg school for communication and journalism and the 
school of policy, planning and development, and director of the toms rivera policy institute, university 
of southern california; robert warren, senior fellow, cms; charles wheeler, director, training and legal 
support,  catholic  legal  immigration  network,  inc.;  and  julia young,  assistant  professor  and  director  of 
undergraduate studies, the catholic university of america.
3   the refugee act of 1980, pub. l. no. 96-212, 94 stat. 102 (1980), established the us refugee resettlement 
program and sought to bring us asylum law into compliance with international law, particularly the 1951 
united nations convention relating to the status of refugees and the 1967 protocol relating to the status 
of refugees. the papers in the us refugee protection collection examine compliance with the letter and spirit 
of international and domestic law, barriers to protection, individual protection program, and due process 
issues.  in  his  introduction  to  the  collection,  kerwin  (2015)  outlines  and  contextualizes  the  findings  and 
recommendations from these papers. in other jmhs articles, tara magner (2016) and melanie nezer (2014) 
analyze the refugee, asylum, and temporary protection provisions in bills taken up by congress in recent 
years.
4   the illegal immigrant reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 (iirira), pub. l. no. 104-
208, 110 stat. 3009-546 (1996), did as much to create the legal and programmatic infrastructure of the us 
immigration enforcement system as any legislation in the last century. it laid the groundwork for new federal/
local  immigration  data-sharing  and  enforcement  programs;  increased  border  and  interior  enforcement; 
expanded  expedited  and  summary  removals;  established  bars  to  admission  based  on  past  undocumented 
status; restricted relief from removal based on family ties and other equities; expanded mandatory detention; 
and created new income and support requirements for visa petitioners. 
5   the papers seek to present new and promising ideas to strengthen the global system of refugee protection. 
cmss us immigration reform initiative arose out of a three-day event that joined officials from the united 
nations, regional bodies, and states with scholars, researchers, and nongovernmental organizations (ngos) 
in anticipation of the un summit on addressing large movements of refugees and migrants on september 
19, 2016. 

543

moving beyond comprehensive immigration reform and trumpcitizenship, immigrant integration, legal immigration reform, family-based immigration, 
seasonal farm workers, undocumented residents, immigration enforcement, labor standards 
enforcement, the discontinuities in the us immigration system, due process, and migration 
governance  issues.  this  paper  highlights  the  collections  major  findings,  themes,  and 
proposals for reform.

findings, themes, and proposals for reform
 
immigration  policymaking  should  be  embedded  in  a  larger  set  of  partnerships, 
processes  and  commitments  that  respond  to  the  conditions  that  force  persons  to 
migrate.   
nations bear the primary responsibility for creating the conditions that allow their residents 
to flourish and, thus, for abating conditions like poverty, persecution, violence, and social 
upheaval. these conditions, as well as natural and manmade disasters, upend peoples lives, 
spur large-scale migration, and place migrants in situations of great vulnerability. they 
also make it more difficult for migrants to find a permanent home. to address the causes of 
forced migration, us immigration policymaking should be situated within a broader set of 
diplomatic, development, rule of law, and security partnerships and processes.6  
over the last decade, more than 150 un member states and thousands of civil society 
representatives have convened through the global forum on migration and development 
 a state-led, nonbinding process  to discuss how to maximize the benefits of migration 
and  reduce  its  inevitable  tensions  and  costs.  from  these  discussions,  a  consensus  has 
emerged on the need to support the disaster relief and development initiatives of expatriate 
communities, leverage the positive effects and reduce the costs of migrant remittances, and 
otherwise realize migrations development potential. the united states should participate 
fully in the migration and development dialogue and in similar processes that treat migrants 
as development actors7 and that champion development as a way to obviate the necessity 
to migrate. it should also seek to promote processes like circular migration that facilitate 
migration-related development inputs.
in  that  vein,  philip  martin  argues  for  migration-related  investments  in  communities  of 
origin and destination. in immigration policy and agriculture: possible directions for 
the future, martin explains that farm employers, especially in the western united states, 
have historically relied heavily on immigrant workers, including the undocumented. an 
estimated 17 percent of those employed in the agriculture industry lack legal status (martin 

6   the global crisis in refugee protection, for example, can be attributed to refugee-producing situations like 
armed conflict, terrorism, and breakdowns in the rule of law. the overarching need in these circumstances is 
to anticipate, prevent, forego, and mitigate refugee-producing conditions, which cannot be accomplished by 
refugee and immigration policies alone (kerwin 2016, 86, 118). 
7   scholars have long recognized migration as an essential development and anti-poverty strategy. a modest 
relaxation  of  barriers  to  labor  migration  can  lead  to  immense  wage  gains  for  persons  moving  from 
developing  to  developed  states  (clemens,  montenegro,  and  pritchett  2008).  increased  income  would,  in 
turn, allow expatriates to contribute to poverty reduction and economic development in their communities of 
origin (porter 2017).  

544

journal on migration and human security2017, 253). seventy percent of us crop workers  not counting those with h-2a visas8 
 were born in mexico and 70 percent of foreign-born crop workers lack immigration 
status (ibid., 254). the steady, decade-long decrease in mexican immigration to the united 
states has led to a shortage of immigrants who can supplement and replace the aging and 
settling us farm labor work force (warren 2017; martin 2017, 258), which may be further 
diminished by increased immigration enforcement. 
farm labor employers are responding to this labor shortage by resorting to 4-s strategies: 
(1) satisfying current workers by offering them bonuses; (2) stretching the work force 
by using mechanical aids and increasing productivity through management changes; (3) 
substituting  workers  through  increased  mechanization;  and  (4)  supplementing  the 
current workforce with h-2a workers (martin 2017, 258-59). martin proposes using the 
monies not paid for social security and unemployment insurance taxes under the h-2a 
program to fund mechanization of the us agricultural sector and economic development 
in migrant-sending communities (ibid., 261). one idea would be to provide h-2a workers 
with tax refunds upon leaving the united states, which could be matched by governments 
in migrant-sending communities to promote development. martin also proposes investment 
in us commodity-specific boards as a way to develop strategies to reduce dependence on 
agricultural hand labor over time.
the  world  economic  forums  2016  report  on  global  risk  found  conflict,  violence, 
water crises, climate change, and economic factors to be strongly associated with rising 
involuntary  migration  (wef  2016,  15).  in  mainstreaming  involuntary  migration  in 
development policies, john harbeson (2016) argues that state fragility produces more 
involuntary  migrants  than  even  civil  war  and  conflict.9  state  fragility  results  from  the 
absence  or  breakdown  in  the  social  contract  between  individual  citizens  and  groups, 
which undermine the government contract or the agreement over the terms by which 
governments can act on behalf of their citizens. 
in response, harbeson proposes that development policies should address socioeconomic, 
cultural, and political distress in migrant-sending states. in addition, the united states and 
other developed states should help to lay the groundwork for building stronger, more durable 
states, characterized by their citizens engagement in consensual problem solving. us 
development  policies,  harbeson  argues,  should  contribute  to  citizen  empowerment  and 
inclusion in fragile states, which will allow their members to flourish and to migrate (if at 
all) by choice, not necessity. 
the us immigration system should reflect liberal democratic values and an inclusive 
vision of national identity. 
from an historical perspective, the election of a nativist president who has consistently 
denigrated immigrants might be understood in light of:
8   the h-2a program allows petitioning employers or agents to bring foreign workers to the united states to 
fill temporary agricultural jobs. among other requirements, petitioners must show that there is a shortage of 
able, willing, qualified and available us workers for the position, and that the foreign worker will not have 
an adverse effect on the wages and working conditions of us workers.
9    harbeson  (2016)  attributes  mass  migration  from  syria, afghanistan,  iraq,  kosovo, albania,  pakistan, 
eritrea, nigeria, iran, ukraine, and russia to state fragility. he defines fragile states as those so weakened 
and tenuously held together that the very possibility of there being effective government within them is at 
risk. 

545

moving beyond comprehensive immigration reform and trump 
 
 
 
 

the record us foreign-born population of 43 million;
the changed composition (since 1965) of the states of origin of immigrants;
the 9/11 attacks and near daily terrorist atrocities throughout the world;
the economic hardship caused by the great recession and its aftermath;
the  struggles  of  many americans  who  feel  that  their  prospects  and  their  childrens 
prospects are diminishing, and that they are on the losing side of globalization; and 
the perceived lack of responsiveness by us political parties to these concerns. 

 
yet, not all of these considerations align with the profile of trump supporters. one pre-
election  analysis,  for  example,  found  no  clear  picture  between  social  and  economic 
hardship and support for trump and no link whatsoever between greater exposure to trade 
competition or competition from immigrant workers and support for nationalist policies in 
america (rothwell and diego-rosell 2016, 19). however, trump attracted higher levels 
of support from persons in racially and culturally isolated communities, with worse health 
outcomes,  lower  social  mobility,  less  social  capital,  greater  reliance  on  social  security 
income and less reliance on capital income. (ibid., 1,19). the need to understand and 
respond to the concerns of these americans may be a pre-requisite to positive immigration 
reform (young 2017).
two papers in this collection address the bitter divisions in the nation, which have made 
it difficult to forge political consensus or even speak a common language on immigration 
reform.  in  you  are  not  welcome  here  anymore:  restoring  support  for  refugee 
resettlement in the age of trump, todd scribner examines the ideology and worldview 
that underlies opposition to the us refugee resettlement program, despite its extraordinary 
success in resettling more than 3.2 million refugees since 1975 and saving countless lives.10 
he  observes  that,  until  the  collapse  of  the  soviet  union,  the  us  refugee  resettlement 
program operated under a cold war paradigm. however, trump administration officials, 
advisors and supporters view the program from a pre-political world view that includes 
many of the features of samuel huntingtons clash of civilizations hypothesis.11 
compelling policy arguments, scribner avers, will not convince these skeptics to support 
resettlement.  rather,  he  urges  refugee  advocates  to  place  less  emphasis  on  advocacy 
efforts aimed at congress and the administration and more on engaging individuals, on 
cultural and personal formation, and rethinking the fundamental narratives that guide 
our decision making and thus our self-understanding as a nation (scribner 2017, 279).
in making america 1920 again? nativism and us immigration, past and present, julia 
young (2017) finds an historical analogue to trump-era hostility towards immigrants in 

10   in an earlier paper, anastasia brown and todd scribner (2014) attributed diminished support for the 
us refugee resettlement program to poor information sharing, a one-size-fits-all integration metric (self-
sufficiency through early employment), the changed composition of refugee flows, federal funding shortages, 
insufficient  support  for  communities  that  experienced  rapid  refugee  influxes,  and  large-scale  secondary 
migration.
11   huntington argued that culture and religion, rather than ideology or political or economic systems, would 
increasingly be the source of global conflict. 

546

journal on migration and human securitythe late 19th and early 20th century. the earlier era experienced conditions including the 
depression of 1893, five years of double-digit unemployment, the russian revolution, the 
homeland security fears engendered by world war i, industrialization and its losers, and 
three decades (by 1920) of large-scale immigration of new and different immigrants. 
young also identifies recurrent nativist tropes. todays nativists characterize undocumented 
mexicans as rapists, drug dealers, and prostitutes; muslims as a national security threat; 
mexicans and central americans as unassimilable; and refugees as both a security threat 
and unassimilable. in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, nativists vilified southern and 
eastern  europeans, asians  (particularly  chinese  and  japanese),  and  mexicans,  arguing 
they were unassimilable due to race, ethnicity, and culture (ibid, 219).12 
nativist policy prescriptions have converged over time as well. as alan kraut (2016a) 
puts it: over fourteen million arrived in the united states between 1900 and the 1920s 
before congress built a wall  not of bricks and mortar, but of laws and procedures. the 
immigration act of 1924 (the johnson-reed act)13 established an annual limit of 150,000 
immigrants from europe, and set annual admission quotas by nationality at two percent 
of the number of a nations residents in the united states in 1890, a time of low numbers 
of southern and eastern european residents. it also barred japanese immigration. todays 
immigration restrictionists set impossible-to-meet enforcement goals, propose ever harsher 
enforcement programs, seek massive cuts in legal migration, and would substantially cut 
and permanently cap refugee resettlement numbers. 
young concludes that nativism never completely disappears and, unfortunately, immigrants 
and their ancestors can and do adopt nativist attitudes themselves. however, nativism can 
subside and proposed nativist legislation can be defeated. that said, she sees donald j. 
trump as a sui generis nativist president and champion of the nativist agenda. todays 
nativists, she writes, have an outlet that earlier generations did not: a president who not 
only seems to agree with many of their argument, but who also stokes the flames of his 
nativism so explicitly and aggressively (young 2017, 228). 
to counteract nativism, young proposes that proponents of strong immigration policies 
should:
 

publicize  the  economic,  social,  and  cultural  contributions  of  groups  targeted  by 
nativist policies; 

  develop a greater understanding of the concerns of trump supporters and respond to 

nativism within that group; 
educate  a  broader  audience  on  the  social,  cultural,  financial,  and  moral  costs  of 
nativism; 

 

  publicize  the  manifold  contributions  of  immigrants  and  the  benefits  of  robust 

immigration policies; and

12   in nativism, an american perennial, alan kraut (2016b) writes: even as the promise of affordable 
land and abundant jobs lured foreigners, native-born americans, some only a generation or two themselves 
from arrival or even less, sought to slam shut the door in fear of job competition, the distortion of their 
cultural values, challenges to their religious beliefs, or even the dilution of their gene pool by amalgamation. 
13   pub. l. no. 68139, 43 stat. 153 (1924).

547

moving beyond comprehensive immigration reform and trump  promote the ideals and interests that would be served by sound immigration reform 

legislation (ibid., 224, 229-31). 

it is incumbent on policy and opinion makers to publicize the broad national interests 
served by us immigration policies. policymakers should, in turn, evaluate and adjust 
us immigration policies based on their success in furthering the nations interests.   
the  us  immigration  system  should  serve  the  nations  interests.  yet,  a  large  swath  of 
the us public questions the interests served by this system, as well as the ability of the 
federal government to administer and enforce its laws. in national interests and common 
ground in the us immigration debate: how to legalize the us immigration system and 
permanently reduce its undocumented population, donald kerwin and robert warren 
seek to clarify the purpose and goals of us immigration policies by analyzing presidential 
signing statements on seminal immigration reform legislation over nearly a century. they 
begin with the johnson-reed act of 1924, end with the homeland security act of 200214 
which created the us department of homeland security (dhs), and include president 
trumans  veto  of  the  immigration  and  nationality act  of  1952  (the  mccarran-walter 
act).15 they find broad consensus on the following interests and propositions regarding the 
us immigration and refugee laws: 
 

families  constitute  the  fundamental  building  block  of  society  and  their  integrity 
should be preserved. 

  admissions policies based on national origin, race or privilege offend the us creed and 

civic values.

  fairness and process should characterize admission and removal decisions.
  providing  haven  to  persons  fleeing  persecution  and  violence  reflects  us  history, 

tradition, and its  core commitment to liberty, freedom and dignity.
immigrants embody the us tradition of self-sufficiency, hard work and drive to succeed, 
and further the nations economic competitiveness.

 

  all us residents deserve access to the benefits of a free and open society (reagan 

1986).

  a system characterized by fair, orderly and secure migration upholds the rule of law 

(ibid.).
illegal  migration  challenges  us  sovereignty,  threatens  us  security,  and  devalues 
citizenship.

 

  criminals and security threats flout us ideals, should not be admitted, and forfeit the 

right to remain. (kerwin and warren 2017, 299)

the political branches of the federal government should publicize the national interests 
advanced by us immigration policies and should evaluate and adjust these policies in light 
of these interests. at the same time, they should acknowledge that none of the interests 

14   pub. l. no. 107296, 116 stat. 2135 (2002).
15   pub. l. no. 82414, 66 stat. 163 (1952). 

548

journal on migration and human securityserved by immigration policies  family, economic, or humanitarian  can be achieved 
only  by  these  policies  (kerwin  and  warren  2017,  303).  the  success  and  integrity  of 
immigrant families, for example, depends not only on the ability of their members to live 
together, but also on a range of domestic policies, public and private institutions, affiliations, 
and  personal  attachments.  socioeconomic  attainment  by  immigrants  and  their  progeny 
depends, in large part, on educational opportunity, the state of the economy, and an open 
job market. us refugee and humanitarian programs invariably depend upon collaboration 
from other states, local communities, nongovernmental actors, and the affected populations 
themselves (ibid.). temporary protection will extend indefinitely without development, 
diplomatic, and rule of law initiatives in sending states that create the conditions that allow 
their residents to stay or return (kerwin 2014a, 63). 
these  insights  affirm  the  need  to  mainstream  immigration  and  refugee  concerns  in 
development policies and in a range of other foreign and domestic policymaking processes 
as  well. at  present,  mainstreaming  does  not  occur  (even  within  dhs)  to  the  degree 
necessary to meet the national interests that the us immigration system is intended to serve 
(kerwin and warren 2017, 305; meissner and kerwin 2009, 92-95). 
the  united  states  should  prioritize  the  gathering  and  dissemination  of  the  best 
available  evidence  on  migration  and  on  the  nations  migration-related  needs  and 
programs, and should use this information to respond flexibly to changing migration 
patterns and new economic developments.
this collection does not take on the difficult and speculative task of projecting long-term 
trends that might influence us employment, family, and humanitarian admissions. however, 
it makes the case that us immigration and refugee policies need to rely on credible and 
timely research and data to meet their underlying goals. as it stands, the us employment-
based immigration system has not been overhauled for 52 years or substantially revised 
for 27 years. moreover, us law does not currently include a mechanism (short of new 
legislation) to adjust visa levels or categories based on changed us needs or priorities. 
[t]he systems lack of flexibility and responsiveness represents a glaring deficiency 
(kerwin and warren 2017, 309).
over the last decade, there have been several proposals to align us immigration policies 
with its labor needs. at least two proposed an independent commission to produce research 
on  labor  needs  and  economic  trends  that  would  inform  adjustments  in  immigration 
admissions (meissner et al. 2006, 41-43; marshall 2009, 22).  
the united kingdom has established an independent advisory body to analyze and report 
on labor shortages and the impacts of immigration.16 however, the political branches of the 
us government lack a formal, independent body which could: 
 

identify the nations evolving labor, family or humanitarian needs that might be met 
through immigration, including on a state and local level; 
identify shortages in skills and occupations necessary to promote that nations economic 
competitiveness; 

 

16   the migration advisory committee, https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/migration-advisory-
committee/about. 

549

moving beyond comprehensive immigration reform and trump 

assess  the  labor  market  contributions  and  other  trajectories  of  those  who  enter  via 
different categories of admission, including family-based visas; 

  propose  adjustments  in  legal  admission  levels  and  categories  to  reflect  the  nations 

needs and interests; 
conduct research on the views of immigrants of the us immigration system in order 
to  strengthen  legal  immigration  programs  and  better  understand  and  address  non-
compliance with the law (ryo 2017); and
champion access by researchers to relevant datasets in order to build a more extensive 
evidence-base on which congress and the executive can make policy judgments in this 
area. (kerwin and warren 2017, 309-10)

 

 

pia  orrenius  and  madeline  zavodny  argue  that  the  status  quo  undermines  us 
competitiveness: rigid caps for permanent residents and some categories of temporary 
foreign workers have resulted in tremendous backlogs and inefficient lotteries and have 
discouraged countless potential would-be immigrants from applying or staying in the united 
states; they may even encourage some companies to open or expand operations overseas 
instead of domestically (orrenius and zavodny 2017, 189). the misalignment between 
us labor needs and available workers also incentivizes illegal migration and hiring.  
by contrast to us legal immigration policies, the us refugee resettlement program provides 
for  annual  adjustments  in  the  numbers  and  origin  of  resettled  refugees  based  on  us 
priorities, changed country conditions, and protection needs.17 beyond refugee admissions, 
the us immigration system should have more flexibility and options for admitting imperiled 
persons who do not meet the narrow refugee standard (kerwin 2014a, 51-53, 62-63). the 
united states should also rely on the growing body of data, indices, and state performance 
rankings to direct its development and diplomatic interventions;18 to anticipate and plan for 
large-scale migrations; and to inform refugee admission and humanitarian parole priorities 
(kerwin and warren 2017, 310-11). 
scholarly papers and human rights reports have extensively documented the us immigration 
enforcement  systems  growth,  strategies,  constituent  parts, 
legal  underpinnings, 
criminalization, informalization, privatization, rule of law alignment, misuse of detention, 
and  failed  reforms  (von  sternberg  2014; aclu  2014;  mrs/usccb  and  cms  2015; 
kerwin 2014b; schriro 2017). other reports have focused on the effects of enforcement, 
particularly  removals,  on  children  and  families  (chaudry  et  al.  2010). a  recent  article 
detailed the effect of mass deportation policies on us mixed-status families, communities, 
the housing market, and the broader economy (warren and kerwin 2017a). 
only  in  recent  years  has  the  effectiveness  of  us  border  enforcement  efforts  received 
significant scrutiny. in is border enforcement effective? what we know and what it 
means,  edward  alden  points  out  that  congress,  the  immigration  and  naturalization 
service (ins), and dhs traditionally employed apprehensions as the primary metric for 

17    each  year,  the  president,  in  consultation  with  congress,  sets  refugee  admission  levels  and  allocates 
refugee numbers by region and to an unallocated reserve.
18   these important resources cover development, human rights, the rule of law, civil rights, receptivity to 
business, corruption, transparency, human capital, state fragility, poverty, and religious liberty. 

550

journal on migration and human securityassessing border control, with the border patrol citing both high and low numbers of arrests 
as evidence of their effectiveness (clinic 2001, 10). as alden observes, however, this 
metric does not count multiple arrests of the same person (recidivism) or actual entries. 
since 2006, the border patrol has used data on turn backs (people who illegally cross and 
return to mexico), got aways (those who enter and elude capture), and apprehensions to 
measure known unauthorized entries (argueta 2016, 22). however, with the exception of 
apprehensions, dhs has never made this data publicly available. congress and the trump 
administration have agreed upon the politically advantageous, but unachievable goal for 
border  enforcement  of  no  unlawful  entries.19 alden  (2017,  485)  argues  that  the  best 
metric would be total illegal entries.
in 2015, the institute for defense analysis (ida) produced the first serious estimates of 
successful illegal entries, finding that entries through the us-mexico border had fallen 
from 1.8 million in fy 2000 to less than 200,000 in fy 2015 (ibid., 486). during this 
period,  the  deterrence  rate,  the  percentage  of  unsuccessful  border  crossers  who  plan 
to cross again, fell from 90 percent to 60 percent, while the likelihood of apprehension 
rose from 40 percent to 55 percent. moreover, these trends persisted over the strongest 
period of job creation in the post-world war ii era when the unemployment fell below 5 
percent (ibid., 484).20 alden concludes that the ida study provides the first compelling 
evidence that enforcement  in particular, the strategy of imposing distinct consequences 
(including criminal prosecutions) based on the severity of the violation  significantly 
contributed to a reduction in illegal entries across the southern border (ibid., 484-85). 
at the same time, he argues that increased border enforcement investments and harsher 
consequences for illegal entries and re-entries may produce diminishing returns for three 
reasons.21 first, mexican migration to the united states has decreased sharply since 2007, 
and a high percentage of the central american border crossers over the last several years 
have  been  asylum  seekers,  who  have  different  incentives  than  economic  migrants  and 
require different treatment under domestic and international law. second, many deportees 
seek to re-enter the united states to live with their families. deterrence strategies will be less 
successful in these circumstances. third, roughly two-thirds of the newly undocumented 
have overstayed visas, rather than illegally crossed a border (warren and kerwin 2017b). 
moreover, overstays leave the undocumented population at relatively high rates (40 percent 
between 2008 and 2015), compared to 24 percent of undocumented border crossers (warren 
2017, 505). thus, the growing proportion of overstays could portend further declines in 
the us undocumented population (ibid.). 
combined, these three developments seem to obviate the need for significant new border 
commitments, and particularly cast doubt on the wisdom of building a 2,000 mile wall. 
the us-mexico border is, and will likely remain, far more secure than when congress 
initiated its enforcement build-up a quarter century ago. rather than make questionable 
new investments in border enforcement, alden proposes that dhs should instead release 
 
19   secure fence act of 2006, pub. l. no. 109- 367, 120 stat. 2638 (2006); border security and immigration 
enforcement improvements, executive order no. 13767, 82 fed. reg. 8793 (jan. 25, 2017).
20   in addition, illegal entries had begun to fall before the great recession (warren 2017).
21   as the institute for defense analysis study showed, marginal increases in apprehension rates have led to 
substantial decreases in recidivism rates and illegal entries. 

551

moving beyond comprehensive immigration reform and trumpits enforcement data and research to allow for a more grounded and vigorous public debate 
on the future of border enforcement.
in  the  promise  of  a  subject-centered  approach  to  understanding  immigration 
noncompliance,  emily  ryo  (2017)  makes  the  case  for  subject-centered  research 
to inform immigration policy. this research seeks to assess how those most affected by 
immigration enforcement experience and view these policies.22 ryos earlier work found 
that undocumented residents see themselves as law-abiding individuals who valued legal 
order and respected national sovereignty notwithstanding their violations of us immigration 
law and who migrated because it was the only morally appropriate way to fulfill their 
deeply felt personal responsibility to provide for their families (ibid., 290). 
ryo  (ibid.,  292)  argues  that  subject-centered  research  contributes  to  a  recognition  of 
the  basic  humanity  and  moral  agency  of  the  undocumented.  it  can  also  lead  to  an 
appreciation of the human costs of us enforcement policies, the adoption of strategies 
to promote voluntary compliance with the law, and the creation of more effective and 
humane policies (ibid.). as it stands, migrants will not likely abide by laws that they think 
impede family survival.
immigrant  integration  strengthens  communities  and  represents  an  important, 
overarching  metric  for  us  immigration  policies. the  successful  integration  of  the 
united states 43 million foreign-born residents and their progeny should be a national 
priority.
from the perspective of immigrants and their families and communities, integration might 
be the best metric for determining the success of the immigration experience.23 the nations 
well-being will increasingly turn on the success of its 43 million foreign-born residents and 
their children.  
in working together: building successful policy and program partnerships for immigrant 
integration, els de graauw and irene bloemraad (2017, 117) report that while immigrants 
continue to integrate successfully (albeit with large variations by group), the united states 
lags behind other developed states in important indicia of integration like naturalization 
rates, voter registration, metrics of economic self-sufficiency, homeownership, workplace 
equality, and poverty rates. 
to improve immigrant integration outcomes in the united states, de graauw and bloemraad 
propose the creation of a national integration program, led by a national immigrant affairs 
office that would build on the work of the bush and the obama administrations to coordinate 
immigrant and refugee integration initiatives across all relevant federal agencies and levels 
of government.24 such an office would need to be vertically integrated to include different 

22   josiah heyman (2013) has written persuasively on the need to engage border residents in the design and 
implementation of enforcement policies that largely take place in their communities. community members 
are uniquely situated to understand the consequences of enforcement programs on the well-being and vitality 
of their communities. 
23   us immigration and refugee protection policies also serve a range of other foreign and domestic policy 
interests.
24   over the last 60 years, federal integration efforts have focused on citizenship, english-language services, 
and a patchwork of additional programs that do not amount to a coherent national program of immigrant 

552

journal on migration and human securitylevels  of  government  and  horizontally  applied  across  public  and  private  sector  actors 
(ibid.,118). 
the  authors  see  the  growing  activism  by  cities  and  states  as  particularly  promising, 
including in 44 cities with formal offices dedicated to immigrant affairs and immigrant 
communities and in the 90 municipalities with commissions, committees, councils, task 
forces,  boards,  initiatives,  and  programs  dedicated  to  immigrant  issues  or  immigrant 
communities  (ibid.,  111-12).25  they  also  highlight  public-private  partnerships  and 
immigrant advocacy networks that prioritize and advance integration. a central component 
of a coherent, national policy would be the ability of immigrants, refugee and grassroots 
organizations to help shape and implement integration policies (ibid., 117). 
integration  depends  on  the  skills,  talents,  and  human  capital  of  immigrants,  as  well  as 
the resources, characteristics, and reception of the receiving community. in citizenship 
after trump, peter spiro (2017) writes that as a general matter, the united states is 
culturally oriented to the assimilation of immigrants and assimilation has been enabled 
by the [nations] lack of a hard ethnic or religious national identity. however, the issue of 
national identity has been strongly contested over the last few years, particularly during the 
long presidential campaign and in the early months of the trump administration. 
in his first inaugural address, george w. bush characterized the united states as the story 
of flawed and fallible people united across the generations by grand and enduring ideals. 
the grandest of these ideals is an unfolding american promise that everyone belongs, that 
everyone deserves a chance, that no insignificant person was ever born (bush 2001). the 
question arises: is this still the nations prevailing vision? is the united states a nation 
bound by a set of civic ideals  dignity, equality, freedom and opportunity  and to the 
institutions that preserve them, or does it define itself by race, ethnicity, religion, and other 
characteristics that make citizenship inaccessible to large categories of immigrants? if the 
latter, then nothing that immigrants without these characteristics bring, build, or contribute 
to the nation will lead to their membership. while exclusionary nationalism is often seen 
as a revolt against globalization, spiro (2017) observes that right-wing and restrictionist 
movements have become transnational. 
during  the  presidential  campaign,  trump  proposed  rescinding  the  14th  amendments 
guarantee of birthright citizenship, which has been an essential expression of the nations 
identity and commitment to immigrant integration. yet spiro does not believe that the trump 
administration is likely to attempt this radical change or otherwise to make citizenship a 
priority. nor, he argues, should pro-immigrant groups provoke a debate they might lost 
over citizenship law and policies. the deficits of us citizenship policy, he writes, are 
minor, the sole exception being the $725 application fee, and there is good reason to 
expect them to stay that way, trumps radicalism notwithstanding. 
spiro recommends that immigrants pursue citizenship for instrumental reasons (protection 
and benefits). however, he foresees that trump will continue to devalue citizenship as 

integration (de graauw and bloemraad 2017, 111)
25   these entities seek to facilitate interaction between immigrants and native-born residents, highlight 
the economic contributions of immigrants, streamline services to immigrants and support immigrant civic 
engagement and entrepreneurial activity (ibid.,114).

553

moving beyond comprehensive immigration reform and trumpa bond of social solidarity, by exacerbating and exploiting us political polarization.26 
the erosion of citizenship solidarities, he writes, should lead individuals and groups to 
pursue local, regional, and global alliances that can safeguard their rights and that more 
strongly reflect their social identities.
an  immigration  federalism  agenda  should  prioritize  cooperation  on  shared 
federal, state and local priorities. it should also recognize the federal governments 
enforcement obligations; the interests of local communities in the safety, well-being, 
and participation of their residents; the importance of federal leadership in resolving 
the challenge posed by the us undocumented population; and the need for civil society 
institutions to serve as mediators of immigrant integration.    
immigration federalism is a permanent feature of the us immigration landscape.27 indeed, 
us  immigration  policy  necessarily  emerges  from  the  tensions  and  interplay  between 
federal, state, local, and civil society institutions.  
while  the  federal  government  establishes  and  implements  immigration  law,  states  and 
localities  play  important  and  often  contested  roles  in  immigration  enforcement  and 
immigrant  integration.  at  present,  some  states  and  localities  seek  to  enhance  federal 
enforcement policies, and others to promote safe and welcoming communities for all their 
residents. some civil society groups, in turn, have promoted whole-of-community responses 
to the needs of immigrants, including the undocumented (kerwin et al. 2017), while others 
have championed self-deportation policies and supported local police participation in 
immigration enforcement. 
in  enforcement,  integration,  and  the  future  of  immigration  federalism,  cristina 
rodriguez(2017)  maintains  that  federalism    both  enforcement  and  integration 
federalism28  provides a framework for considering the extent to which local immigration 
priorities  can  diverge  from  federal  policy,  the  tension  between  immigrant  control  and 
inclusion, and the scope of permissible conflict between the federal government, states and 
localities on these issues.29 
in its first decision on immigration federalism in 30 years, the supreme court in arizona 
v.  united  states30  substantially  curtailed  (without  eliminating)  autonomous  local 
enforcement measures that diverged from the federal enforcement agenda (ibid., 516). 
the court invalidated provisions of arizonas sb 1070 that supported federal goals (like 
preventing  unauthorized  work),  but  that  adopted  different  means  for  achieving  them 
(making unauthorized work a misdemeanor under state law). it also articulated a theory of 
preemption that treated federal enforcement priorities as federal law. 

 
26   similarly, alan kraut (2016a) argues that trumps america first rhetoric seeks to marginalize large 
sectors of society and fray the bonds of citizenship. 
27    this  term  speaks  to  the  distinct  responsibilities  and  contributions  of  the  federal  government,  states, 
localities, and civil society to us immigration policy. 
28   these two forms of federalism overlap in that enforcement invariably affects integration, and integration 
policies can work at cross purposes to enforcement initiatives.
29   immigration federalism disputes increasingly involve states and localities (rodriguez 2017, 536). 
30   567 u.s. __, 132 s.ct. 2492 (2012).

554

journal on migration and human securitythe case for local cooperation with the federal government may be strongest when federal 
law has established a role for states and localities in enforcement, as iirira did in creating 
the section 287(g) program.31 perhaps the most consequential area of intergovernmental 
cooperation  involves  information  sharing.  under  the  secure  communities  program, 
states,  counties,  and  localities  send  the  fingerprints  of  persons  they  arrest  to  the  fbis 
integrated automated fingerprint identification system (iafis) database. as required by 
federal statute, the federal bureau of investigation forwards this information for screening 
by dhss biometric identification system (ident) to detect immigration violations. in 
addition, the federal government can use its spending power to incentivize localities to 
serve federal objectives [on immigration] by conditioning federal funds on compliance 
with certain terms (ibid., 523).32 
on the other hand, a dhs mandate that local officials detain persons (to allow federal 
officials time to take custody of them) beyond their normal release dates fits comfortably 
within  the  prohibition  against  commandeering  (forced  participation)  set  forth  in  the 
tenth amendment  to  the  us  constitution  (ibid.). and,  several  lower  courts  have  held 
that honoring federal detainer requests that require holding detainees beyond the period 
they would otherwise be released constitutes an unconstitutional seizure under the fourth 
amendment (ibid., 520). 
rodriguez writes that an enforcement dtente might be in the mutual interests of the 
federal government and localities, given the importance of maintaining functional, cordial 
intergovernmental relations, and given the value of federal-local cooperation not only with 
respect to law enforcement writ large, but also across other domains. (ibid., 526).33 in 
fact, most localities already respond favorably to detainer requests that involve violent 
criminals. moreover, enforcement cooperation extends well beyond local assistance of 
federal  deportation  policy  and  can  include  joint  efforts  that  even  enforcement  skeptics 
could support, such as cooperation to target smuggling rings (ibid.). 
to further a coordinated approach to integration, rodriguez proposes an intergovernmental 
strategy that plays to the institutional competencies of the different levels of government, 
in which the federal government would provide a strong integration scaffolding, which 
would  include  sharing  information,  coordinating  best  practices,  and  providing  robust 
resource  support,  while  localities  would  administer  the  institutions  most  vital  to 
immigrant integration (ibid, 531-33). like de graauw and bloemraad, rodriguez argues 
that public/private partnerships and the active participation of civil society will be vital to 
such a system. 
she sets forth several principles that should guide a us federalism agenda. first, the federal 
government should acknowledge the reasons for local resistance to federal enforcement 
(ibid., 512).34 

31   this program permits dhs to train and partner with state and local law enforcement agencies on federal 
immigration enforcement priorities. 
32   as a caveat, only congress  not the executive  can place restrictions on federal grants.
33   to that end, as rodriguez observes, states and localities can opt to avoid federalism disputes, while 
achieving their preferred policy outcomes. for example, if they seek to minimize the deportation of their 
residents due to minor criminal violations, they can amend their criminal laws and charging practices. 
34   it would also behoove policymakers to recognize how immigrants and immigrant communities see and 

555

moving beyond comprehensive immigration reform and trumpsecond, it is inevitable that complications will arise from immigration federalism, as it 
seeks to reconcile the federal governments constitutional and statutory responsibilities to 
enforce the law, with the lived realities of immigrant communities (ibid., 510). moreover, 
immigration federalisms government actors have distinct institutional imperatives which 
influence  their  views  on  immigration  and  integration,  apart  from  their  ideological  or 
political orientations.35
third, resolving the challenge of a large undocumented population is ultimately a task for the 
political branches of the federal government. states and localities have substantial influence 
over immigration policy: they can adopt policies and enter public/private partnerships that 
seek to treat the undocumented and their families as full community members, or they can 
make life so difficult for the undocumented that they will be forced to leave. however, the 
question of status and a possible path to citizenship must ultimately be addressed by the 
federal government. 
fourth,  federalism  is  not  served  by  instrumental  legal  claims    like  on  the  scope  of 
executive discretion on how to enforce the law  that might further preferred policy 
objectives in one context, but might do the opposite in another (ibid., 512).  
although counterintuitive in light of the volume of federal litigation in the first months of 
the trump administration, immigration federalism highlights the importance of democratic 
processes and the hard work of citizenship. federal, state, and local governments each 
occupy important space in our federal system, and can significantly influence the treatment 
of immigrants, and the well-being of their communities.    
immigration reform should be coupled with strong, well-enforced labor standards 
in order to promote fair wages and safe and healthy working conditions for all us 
workers.
an extensive literature documents gaps in us labor standards and workplace health and 
safety laws, under-resourced enforcement strategies, the use of immigration enforcement 
to suppress labor organizing, and the exploitation of undocumented and other vulnerable 
workers to drive down wages and working conditions.36 combined, these factors subvert 
one of the core goals of us immigration policy, to meet us labor needs without diminishing 
the job prospects, wages, or working conditions of natives. 
in segmentation and the role of labor standards enforcement in immigration reform, 
janice fine and gregory lyon argue that this goal cannot be met without strengthened 
labor standards enforcement, comprised of vertical enforcement (strong, government-
enforced standards) and lateral mechanisms that enlist affected workers, worker centers, 
and other community-based institutions. fine and lyon observe that these individuals and 
institutions have both direct knowledge of labor standards violations and a strong incentive 
to remedy them. 

experience integration policies (ryo 2017).
35   even ideologically aligned federal, state, and local administrations may differ on immigration enforcement 
and integration issues, given their distinct institutional imperatives. 
36   for a slightly dated review of the relevant literature, see kerwin and mccabe (2011). 

556

journal on migration and human securityfine  and  lyon  (2017,  434)  argue  that  firm  management  practices,  outdated  laws,  and 
insufficient labor standards enforcement  rather than immigrants themselves  undermine 
labor markets and working conditions.  at the same time, immigrant laborers, particularly 
the undocumented, endure widespread exploitation, with negative implications for other 
workers. in a well-functioning immigration system, they write, migrant workers should 
not be used as a strategy for employers to evade basic labor and employment laws (ibid., 
437). 
a legalization program would remove one area of vulnerability (lack of status) for low-wage 
workers. however, it would need to be coupled with strengthened and well-resourced labor 
standards enforcement. the authors endorse recent bills that would increase the penalties 
for unpaid wages, unpaid overtime wages, and retaliatory discrimination or whistle-blowing 
(ibid.,  445).  in  addition,  they  support  measures  that  would  allow  immigrants  to  report 
violations of the law and participate in investigations without fear of reprisal (ibid.). they 
also propose that temporary visa holders should receive the same labor rights as citizens, 
so that employers can no longer use immigration status as leverage against workers to 
hold  down  wages  (ibid.).  they  conclude  that  [e]xpanding  the  scope  of  immigration 
reform to include labor standards enforcement is fundamental to ensuring that the rights of 
immigrants are upheld and all workers, immigrants or otherwise, stand on equal footing not 
just with each other, but with their employers as well (ibid., 446). 
fairness and due process should characterize us admission, custody and removal 
decisions.
in  the  us  immigration  debate,  politicians  and  other  opinion  makers  regularly  describe 
illegal entries as a failure of rule of law and a breach of sovereignty. yet the rule of law 
speaks to the aspiration that legal systems protect fundamental rights, ensure accessible, 
full,  and  fair  processes,  and  impartially  adjudicate  claims  (kerwin  2014b).  while  the 
immigration courts offer a modicum of due process, the removal adjudication system does 
not honor the rule of law, protect rights, or impartially adjudicate claims to remain. of 
primary concern, the overwhelming majority of persons removed never see the inside of a 
court, but are subject to summary, non-court removal processes (aclu 2014).37 
in her article immigration adjudication: the missing rule of law, lenni benson points 
out that summary, non-court removal procedures make access to an impartial adjudicator 
and legal counsel nearly impossible. as such, these processes deny persons facing removal 
an  opportunity  to  present  their  claims.  moreover,  they  have  created  a  vulnerable  and 
trapped class of residents who will not leave the country due to their fear of the criminal 
consequences of re-entry and who have few ways to correct or regularize their status 
(benson 2017, 343). 
37   expedited removal, for example, applies to noncitizens who attempt to enter the united states without 
or with improper documents. reinstatement of removal applies to persons who were ordered removed or 
departed voluntarily while under a removal order, and who re-entered the united states. dhs no longer 
publicly releases yearly data on summary or expedited removals. however, in 2013, these two processes alone 
accounted for 83 percent of all removals (simansky 2014, 5). administrative removals apply to noncitizens 
who are not legal permanent residents (lprs) and who committed an aggravated felony, a broad class of 
crimes that includes crimes that are neither aggravated or felonies. to receive a stipulated order of removal, 
a noncitizen must admit the factual claims against him or her, concede deportability or inadmissibility, and 
waive his or her right to appeal the removal order (aclu 2014, 29). an immigration judge must sign off on 
stipulated orders, but not afford a hearing. 

557

moving beyond comprehensive immigration reform and trumpan unfortunate effect of the division of the former ins into three dhs agencies has been 
diminished  appreciation  by  immigration  enforcement  agents  of  the  agencys  protection 
responsibilities.  customs  and  border  protection  (cbp)  and  immigration  and  customs 
enforcement (ice) agents tend to view protection as a barrier to performing their jobs, not 
one of their statutory responsibilities. of particular concern, border officials are required 
to refer persons subject to expedited removal to a credible fear interview by an asylum 
officer if they ask to apply for asylum or express a fear of persecution.38 if deemed to have 
a credible fear, an asylum seeker is referred to immigration court where he or she can seek 
asylum in removal proceedings. 
however, many cbp officials refuse to refer asylum seekers to credible fear interviews, 
and produce intentionally false sworn statements from them (human rights first 2017). 
they also seek to dissuade asylum seekers from pursuing a claim by mischaracterizing us 
asylum standards and threatening them with lengthy periods of detention and separation 
from their family members. 
procedural requirements also serve to block access to asylum. the one-year (from entry) 
asylum filing rule, for example, bars the claims of high percentages of bona fide asylum 
seekers (schrag et al. 2010).39
the perennially under-resourced us immigration court system struggles under a backlog 
of nearly 600,000 cases, which have been pending an average of 670 days. this backlog 
presents another rule of law and due process challenge (trac 2017). the us immigration 
court system is a branch of the department of justice (doj). the american bar association 
(aba),  national  association  of  immigration  judges,  and  other  groups  have  raised 
concerns related to the systems fairness, professionalism, funding, and even (on occasion) 
its independence. the latter concern will likely be more acute in the trump administration.
us immigration law lacks sufficient options for resolving cases. removal proceedings tend 
to be all or nothing affairs, leading either to removal or, less commonly, legal status and 
the ability to remain. exacerbating this problem, dhs officials fail to exercise discretion 
in referring cases (or not) to this system. in addition, immigration judges cannot weigh 
and act on the individual circumstances in the cases before them, which contributes to 
case backloads and exacerbates resource deficiencies (ibid., 335). as benson points out: 
if immigration policies allowed people to regularize their status, had a mechanism for 
correcting errors of judgment, or contained fines or punishments for immigration rules that 
were proportionate to the interests at stake, it is very likely that it would not be under the 
current strain (ibid., 337).  
the lack of court-appointed counsel for indigent or other vulnerable immigrants also looms 
large as a barrier to the full and fair adjudication of claims. legal representation facilitates 
more informed decisions in removal cases, increases court efficiency, and operates as a check 
on the treatment of detainees in custody (ibid., 351). as several studies have demonstrated, 

38   immigration and nationality act (ina) 235(b)(1)(a)(ii).
39   the provision was enacted to address concerns related to fraudulent asylum claims, which it has failed 
to do (schrag et al. 2010). similarly, expedited removal started as a tool to weed out weak claims with 
little likelihood of success on the merits, but it has become a pillar of the immigration enforcement system 
(benson 2017, 344).

558

journal on migration and human securitylegal representation also makes it several times more likely that asylum seekers and others in 
removal proceedings will prevail in their claims (ramji-nogales, schoenholtz, and schrag 
2009). the adversarial nature of removal proceedings, their substantive and procedural 
complexity, and the immense (sometime life and death) consequences of adverse decisions 
make effective pro se representation virtually impossible (kerwin 2005).
the manifest need to reform the us detention system, to minimize the use of detention, and 
to rid the system of privately owned and administered prisons have been well-documented 
(mrs/usbbc  and  cms  2015).  the  pervasive  use  of  immigration  detention  also 
undermines due process. detention burdens the ability of persons in removal proceeding to 
corroborate their claims or to secure counsel. an exhaustive study of 1.2 million removal 
cases  between  2007  and  2012  found  that  only  14  percent  of  detainees  obtained  legal 
representation,  compared  to  two-thirds  of  non-detainees  (eagly  and  shafer  2016).  the 
lack of representation, confusion over the status of their cases and seemingly indefinite 
confinement in dismal conditions leads many to abandon their claims. 
the  civil  removal  adjudication  system  inappropriately  provides  fewer  substantive  and 
procedural protections than the us criminal justice system (ahmed, appelbaum, and jordan 
2017). dhs can, in theory, exercise discretion in deciding which undocumented persons to 
apprehend and place in removal proceedings. however, unlike criminal prosecutors who 
have broad discretion in negotiating plea agreements, the discretion of ice trial attorneys 
and doj immigration judges is tightly circumscribed. in addition, the absence of mens rea 
(knowledge and intent to break the law) cannot be invoked as a defense to removal, even in 
the cases of undocumented persons brought to the united states as children. 
strong  immigration  enforcement  policies  should  be  accompanied  by  an  equally  strong 
commitment to due process, fairness, and the rule of law. if adopted, the following proposals 
would create a more rights respecting and efficient removal adjudication system.  
  congress should broaden the equitable relief from removal, affording particular weight 
to the claims of persons who have not knowingly or intentionally violated the law, and 
it should provide options short of removal (like fines) that would allow government 
attorneys to settle cases. 

  congress  and  dhs  should  substantially  limit,  if  not  abandon  entirely,  expedited 
removal, and should instead either deny noncitizens admission or provide them with 
full removal proceedings in immigration court. (benson 2017, 342) 

  all removal cases should be adjudicated or reviewed by an immigration judge (mrs/

usccb and cms 2016, 194). 

  congress should significantly increase funding to the immigration court system and 
should establish a funding benchmark for the immigration courts at roughly 5 percent 
of the budget of the two dhs enforcement agencies, cbp and ice.

  congress should create an independent article 1 immigration court40 like the us tax 
court or us bankruptcy court, or an independent adjudicatory agency for immigration 

40   article 1, section 8 of the us constitution grants congress the right to establish tribunals inferior to 
the supreme court.

559

moving beyond comprehensive immigration reform and trumplike the national labor relations board or the occupational safety and health review 
commission (aba 2010, 6-4 to 6-40). 

  dhs  officials  should  be  afforded  the  resources  and  responsibility  to  investigate 
and  review  the  files  of  persons  who  are  subject  to  removal  prior  to  referring  them 
for  removal  (benson  2017,  340-341).  in  deciding  whether  to  place  a  noncitizen  in 
removal proceedings, they should assess the individual equities in the case, including 
us family ties, length of residence, business ties, blameworthiness, and the severity of 
the immigration violation.    

  dhs officials should be allowed to grant stays of removal based on a similar set of 

equitable considerations (benson 2017, 340). 
ice attorneys should be given the legal authority and bargaining tools  to grant 
temporary work authorization, conditional residency, and legal status in limited cases 
 that permit the settlement of cases, short of removal (ibid., 341). 

 

  cbp and ice agents should not be granted authority to screen asylum seekers or to 

make removal decisions.

  congress  should  establish  a  statute  of  limitations  for  civil  immigration  violations, 
which would contribute to a fairer adjudicatory process and afford a sense of finality 
and security to persons who have built strong equitable ties and have lived in the united 
states for many years (ibid., 348). 

  congress should eliminate mandatory detention, use detention only as a last resort (not 
the default option) when no other less restrictive alternatives can ensure the immigrants 
appearance throughout the removal adjudication process, and subject custody decisions 
to court review, regular hearings, and reasonable bond levels. 

  congress and dhs should substantially invest in effective, community-based alternative 
to detention programs (mrs/usccb and cms 2015, 186-89, 192-93; noferi 2015). 
  dhs  should  disinvest  in  private  prisons,  which  provide  less  transparency  and 
accountability in carrying out a function that implicates fundamental liberty interests 
and that should thus be met by government officials (mrs/usccb and cms 2015, 
184-86, 192).  

  congress should rescind the one-year asylum filing deadline (schrag et al. 2010). 
  the federal government should provide for government-funded counsel for indigent 
and particularly vulnerable persons (like children and the mentally ill), and sufficient 
funding to advise everybody in removal proceeding of their legal rights and options. 

family unity should remain a central goal of us immigration policy and a pillar of 
the us immigration system. 
family  unity  has  been  the  cornerstone  of  us  legal  immigration  policies  since  1965, 
and family-based visas account for two-thirds of immigrant (permanent) visas awarded 
each  year.  the  us  refugee  program  and  several  non-immigrant  (temporary)  programs 

560

journal on migration and human securityalso prioritize the admission of family members. however, family-based immigration is 
disfavored by the trump administration and many in congress, in comparison to merits-
based policies that favor skilled workers. 
in us immigration policy and the case for family unity, zoya gubernskaya and joanna 
dreby argue that family-based immigration brings economic benefits, and operates as a 
de facto immigrant support and integration policy at no cost to the government. while 
family-based immigrants are often viewed as a social burden, the differences in human 
capital  between  employment-based  and  family-based  visa  beneficiaries  disappear  over 
time  (gubernskaya  and  dreby  2017,  423).  unlike  employment-based  immigrants,  the 
authors  report  that  the  status  of  family-based  immigrants  does  not  depend  on  their 
employers. (ibid., 424). this gives them more freedom to make the best use of their 
skills  and  experiences  and  motivates  them  to  invest  in  education,  increasing  their 
employment opportunities and income (ibid.). family-based immigrants also benefit from 
the assistance provided by their us family members in the areas of housing, healthcare 
access, transportation, school enrollment, and enrichment activities for children, which 
facilitate their integration (ibid). 
the authors propose that family unity remain a centerpiece of us immigration policy due 
to the [p]ositive socioeconomic outcomes of family immigrants and their children and 
evidence of [the] economic, social, and psychological benefits of family support (ibid., 
426). they conclude that the family serves as a buffer that aids immigrant integration, 
provides a social and economic safety net for new americans, helps to incorporate [them], 
and builds new businesses in the united states (ibid.). 
gubernskaya and dreby also underscore how us policies undermine, divide, and stress 
us families, particularly those with undocumented members. for example, many potential 
visa beneficiaries who have a qualifying relationship with a us citizen or legal permanent 
resident (lpr) must live apart from their petitioning family member for years due to visa 
backlogs, which vary based on family preference category and nationality. undocumented 
border crossers living in the united states who have a qualifying family relationship to a 
us citizen or lpr must leave the country for consular processing when their visa priority 
date becomes current. in departing, however, they become subject to multi-year bars to 
re-entry based on unlawful presence. these bars operate as a disincentive to leaving the 
country  and,  thus,  securing  status  (kerwin,  meissner,  and  mchugh  2011). the  obama 
administration established a procedure to pre-adjudicate waivers to the bars (uscis 2016), 
but even if the waiver is pre-approved, consular processing can lead to long-term separation 
from us family members.41 
beyond these well-documented provisions, us citizens with undocumented spouses must 
often  forego  many  of  the  benefits  of  citizenship,  including  travel  and  (often)  the  right 
to live with their spouse in the united states. in addition, us children in mixed-status 
households  experience  unrelenting  stress  from  the  threat  of  a  parents  deportation  and, 

41   ina section 245(i) allows undocumented persons who pay a substantial fine to adjust to lpr status in 
the united states, but this process is available only to the small minority of visa beneficiaries whose petitions 
were filed on or before april 30, 2001. as a result, very few persons who have illegally crossed us borders 
can adjust status under this provision. by contrast, persons who entered legally but overstayed the period of 
their temporary visas are considered to have been admitted and, thus, can adjust status in the united states.

561

moving beyond comprehensive immigration reform and trumpwhen deportation occurs, immense emotional and financial hardship (gubernskaya and 
dreby 2017, 422). minimum income requirements also discriminate against lower-income 
us citizens or lprs who petition for and financially sponsor family members for visas 
(lopez 2017, 240). 
to address these problems, the authors propose ending the long-term separation of lprs 
from their family members, allowing prospective visa recipients to join petitioning family 
members  in  the  united  states,  and  creating  a  new  path  to  legal  status  for  fathers  and 
mothers of us citizen children (gubernskaya and dreby 2017, 425). these reforms would 
provide  greater  opportunities  for  gaining  legal  status  and  contesting  removal  based  on 
family ties in the united states. congress should also repeal the bars to re-entry based on 
unlawful presence or, in the alternative, allow potential family-based visa beneficiaries 
who illegally crossed a border to adjust status in the united states (lopez 2017, 247). in 
addition, it should repeal the minimum income requirement for sponsorship of a family 
member (ibid.). 
in  separated  families:  barriers  to  family  reunification after  deportation,  deborah 
boehm puts a human face on how us immigration policies and enforcement practices 
divide families (boehm 2017, 403-04).42 in three compelling case studies, boehm illustrates 
the very limited relief from removal under us law based on family ties.43 cancellation 
of removal, the main form of equitable relief is available to non-lprs who have been 
continuously  present  in  the  united  states  for  at  least  10  years,  can  demonstrate  moral 
character, have not been convicted of a broad array of crimes, and can show demonstrate 
exceptional and extremely unusual hardship to a us citizen or lpr spouse, parent, or 
child.44 once removal occurs, family reunification through legal channels becomes even 
less likely (ibid, 402). 
boehm (ibid., 413) proposes that the united states create policies with enough flexibility 
to facilitate family unity in the united states, recognize the rights of us citizen children 
to family unity by liberalizing the standard for cancellation of removal, and accommodate 
a path to authorized return after deportation.
the united states should seek to craft win-win immigration policies that serve its 
own interests and that benefit migrant-sending states. such policies will enjoy broad 
acceptance and be more likely to achieve their purposes. 
the success  of  us  immigration policies invariably depends on  cooperation from other 
nations,  whether  in  responding  to  the  causes  of  forced  migration,  promoting  the 
humane  treatment  of  migrants  in  transit,  protecting  migrants  in  destination  states,  or 
receiving returning nationals (kerwin and warren 2017, 305). cooperation will be more 
forthcoming when us policies benefit states of origin and their citizens. in responding to 
large-scale refugee and migrant movements, cooperation has been strongest on interception 
and immigration enforcement policies (frelick, kysel, and podkul 2016). yet us legal 

42   removals affect far more persons than those removed. for example, there are 6.6 million us citizens, 
including  5.7  million  children,  living  in  households  with  undocumented  residents,  mostly  their  parents 
(warren and kerwin 2017).
43   boehm also points out the limited categories of family members for whom visas are available.
44   ina  240a(b). 

562

journal on migration and human securityimmigration policies can offer a more promising vehicle for meeting the diverse needs of 
migrant-sending states.  
the outline of potential win-win labor migration policies can be seen in data on the aging 
and  shrinking  workforces  in  developed  states,  and  younger  populations  in  developing 
states. fei guo (2016) refers to global demographic realities as the silent driving force 
behind international migration. as figure 1 illustrates, total fertility rates45 have fallen well 
below the population replacement level in most developed regions and states. as a result, 
these states have experienced structural shortages in both the unskilled and skilled labor 
force.

figure 1. total fertility rate, 1950-2015

 
 
source: guo (2016, 4), using data from the un population divisions world population prospects 2015 
revision.
robust  immigration  policies  cannot  alone  ensure  sustainable  working  age  populations 
and address unsustainable levels of aging. however, it is also the case that without more 
vigorous and pro-active immigration policies, developed states will be able to establish an 
acceptable ratio between retirement and working age residents.    
this stark dynamic has been mitigated in the united states by the relative youth and high 
fertility rates of its large immigrant population (reznik, shoffner, and weaver 2005-2006, 
38). nonetheless, the challenge remains immense. each day until 2030, 10,000 members 
of the 76 million us baby boomer generation will turn 65. as evidence of the aging of 
white america, there are roughly an even number of non-hispanic whites and all other 
ethnic groups represented among us children age five and below, but the percentages of 
whites rise steadily by age group, topping out at 82 percent among us residents age 75 and 
above (figure 2).  

45   total fertility rate refers to the average number of children born to each woman in a nation.

563

moving beyond comprehensive immigration reform and trumpfigure 2. the current population of the united states by 
age group and ethnicity (acs, 2009-2014)

 
source: klineberg (2017, 16-17) using data from the us census bureaus 2009-2013 american community 
survey 5-year estimates.
by 2050, non-hispanic whites will constitute 36 percent of us children age 5 or below, but 
64 percent of residents age 75 and above (figure 3).

figure 3. the projected population of the united states 
by age group and ethnicity in 2050

source:  klineberg  (2017)  using  data  from  us  census  bureaus  2012  national  population  projections, 
alternative net international migration series (constant series).

564

journal on migration and human securitybetween 1990 and 2030, the percent of the foreign-born population between the prime 
working ages of 18 and 64 is projected to double to 20 percent and it will continue to increase, 
although at a slower rate, from 2030 to 2050 (figure 4). by contrast, the percentage of the 
us population age 65 and over is projected to increase from 13 to 20 percent between 2010 
and 2030 (ortman, velkoff, and hogan 2014, 2-3),

figure 4. percent of foreign-born in the population aged 
18 to 64: 1990 to 2050

source: kerwin and warren (2017), using data from the us census for 1990 to 2010, and  colby and ortman 
(2014) for 2020 to 2050.
to address this emerging demographic crisis, the united states should reform its legal 
immigration policies and make it a national priority to attract necessary skilled and unskilled 
workers over the next three decades. if it fails to do so, policymakers and the public may 
well be looking back nostalgically on the era of large-scale undocumented migration from 
mexico in the 1990s and early 2000s.
us immigration law and policy should be coherent and consistent, and the united 
states should create legal migration opportunities for persons uprooted due to us 
foreign interventions, trade policies, and immigration laws.  
in creating cohesive, coherent immigration policy, pia orrenius and madeline zavodny 
argue that the us immigration system often works at cross purposes with itself. policymakers 
often fail to anticipate or account for the likely consequences of us immigration programs. 
us immigration laws, for example, have generated a need for visas for family members of 
primary program beneficiaries and others, but have often failed to meet this need. 
the immigration reform and control act of 1986 (irca)46 program legalized 2.7 million 
46   pub. l. no. 99-603, 100 stat. 3445 (1986).

565

moving beyond comprehensive immigration reform and trumppersons,47 but did not offer derivative status to their close family members, sowing the 
seeds of the current 4.26 million person family-based immigration backlog ( orrenius and 
zavodny 2017, 183; dos-bca 2016). based on the experience of irca and other laws, 
orrenius and zavodny urge congress to consider the ramifications of immigration laws 
and policies on future flows to the united states and provide for the legal admission of the 
family members of direct beneficiaries (orrenius and zavodny 2017, 189).
they  also  point  to  mismatches  between  temporary  non-immigrant  work  visas  and 
permanent employment-based visas that foreclose the possibility of permanent status for 
non-immigrants with us job offers and, thus, work at cross-purposes with us economic 
and labor needs (ibid., 184, 190). they propose that temporary workers who qualify for 
permanent employment-based visas should be able to apply and receive them in a timely 
manner, without having to meet additional burdensome requirements (ibid., 191).
congress has also created temporary programs, like temporary protected status (tps), for 
populations that often need long-term protection (bergeron 2014). orrenius and zavodny 
(2017, 190) propose that tps recipients who cannot be safely returned home after one 
extension of status be allowed to apply for permanent status.
kerwin  and  warren  (2017)  argue  that  policy  coherence  also  requires  that  the  united 
states anticipate and take steps to minimize forced migration resulting from its foreign 
interventions, trade policies, and other international commitments. because us military 
interventions, for example, can reasonably be expected to uproot large numbers of persons, 
the united states should take steps to minimize the dislocation and to secure refuge for the 
displaced, including through the us refugee resettlement and immigration programs. in 
addition, the north american free trade agreement (nafta) uprooted large numbers of 
mexican family farmers, but did not offer legal migration opportunities for most displaced 
workers (fernndez-kelly and massey 2007, 99). 
the united states should reduce the size of its undocumented population through a 
substantial legalization program and seek to ensure that this population never again 
approximates its current size. 
in recent years, it has become evident that the era of large-scale illegal immigration and 
undocumented population growth has come to a close and that the us legal immigration 
system must be reformed to preserve and build on this progress (warren 2017). 
the trump administration has embarked on a mass deportation policy, which will devastate 
families, the economy, and the social fabric (warren and kerwin 2017a). by contrast, a 
broad  legalization  program  will  strengthen  families,  communities,  and  the  economy. a 
legalization program would also acknowledge the transitional nature of immigration status 
(many undocumented persons will ultimately attain legal status under current laws), the 
high (and growing) percentage of undocumented residents with long tenure and strong 
47   irca included four legalization programs: (1) a general program for persons who lacked status from 
january 1, 1982 to the date of the bills enactment, and who met continuous presence and other requirements; 
(2) a special agricultural worker (saw) program that applied to persons who performed seasonal agricultural 
work for at least 90 days in a 12-month period in 1985 and 1986; (3) a registry program for persons who 
arrived in the united states prior to january 1, 1972; and (4) a small program for certain cuban-haitian 
entrants who arrived prior to january 1, 1982.

566

journal on migration and human securityequitable ties (including children) in the united states, the blamelessness of undocumented 
persons brought to the united states as children, and the large population eligible for status 
who do not know it or cannot afford to pursue it (kerwin and warren 2017, 320; warren 
and kerwin 2015, 99-100).48  
beyond an earned legalization program, congress should substantially advance the registry 
cut-off date and automatically move the date forward by one year each year thereafter 
(kerwin  and  warren  2017,  322-23).  the  registry  program  offers  status  to  long-term 
undocumented residents who entered by a statutorily set date, can demonstrate good moral 
character, are not ineligible for citizenship, and are not inadmissible on certain security 
and  other  grounds.49  since  the  programs  inception  in  1929,  congress  has  infrequently 
advanced the cut-off date for entry. most recently, in 1986, irca set this date at january 
1, 1972, meaning that virtually no undocumented persons now qualify for the program. 
however, if congress advanced the date to january 1, 2002, five million persons would 
potentially be able to register.50
to many, irca offers positive proof that a legalization program will invariably spur high 
levels of illegal migration. however, ircas shortcomings need not be repeated in a future 
legalization program.51 coherent, flexible, fact-based policies that are closely aligned to 
us interests will help to keep this population in check,52 as will the elimination of barriers 
to legal status like the three- and ten-year bars and the limited eligibility for the section 
245(i)  program  (kerwin  and  warren  2017,  321-22). a  registry  program  that  regularly 
advanced the qualifying date of entry would also minimize the size of this population. 
in the meantime, us immigrant-serving agencies should initiate a massive legal screening 
program for low-income undocumented immigrants, accompanied by a public education 

48   the us undocumented population includes: (1) a high percentage of the 4.26 million persons languishing 
in family-based visa backlogs; (2) a large number  in the 15 percent range who may be eligible for an 
immigration benefit or relief, but do not know it or cannot afford the cost or have otherwise chosen not to 
pursue it (wong et al. 2014; kerwin et al. 2017, 9); (3) millions who will ultimately gain status under current 
laws (jasso et al. 2008); (4) 1.9 million with 20 years or more of us residency, 1.6 million with 15 to 19 years 
of us residency, and 3.1 million with 10 to 14 years of us residency (warren and kerwin 2015, 98-100); 
(5) 3.9 million parents of us citizens or lprs who would have qualified for the deferred action for parents 
of americans and lawful permanent residents (dapa) program; and (6) 2.5 million brought to the united 
states at age 15 or under (warren and kerwin 2015, 95; kerwin and warren 2017, 321). 
49   ina 249.
50   another way to legalize long-term undocumented residents would be to allow them to apply affirmatively 
for cancellation of removal, rather than to have to wait until they are in removal proceedings.  
51   among its shortcomings, irca failed to: (1) reform the us legal immigration system in ways that would 
have allowed it to accommodate the high demand for lower-skilled work (met by undocumented workers) 
in the 1990s and early 2000s; (2) provide derivative status to the close family members of its beneficiaries, 
thus laying the groundwork for the current multi-year backlogs in the family-based immigration system; (3) 
legalize sufficient numbers of undocumented persons; (4) account for the possibility (which quickly came to 
pass) that legalized agricultural workers would leave this work and be replaced by undocumented workers; 
and  (5)  meaningfully  enforce  ircas  employer  verification  and  sanctions  program  (kerwin  and warren 
2017, 315-16). 
52   immigration reform can occur without increasing the total number of visas granted per year if the federal 
government reissues the visas of persons who emigrate (warren and kraly 1985). between 2010 and 2015, 
the average annual emigration of visa holders was 284,000 (kerwin and warren 2017). re-issuing these visas 
could remove a political barrier to immigration reform. 

567

moving beyond comprehensive immigration reform and trumpand advocacy campaign to allow those who may qualify for legal status to pursue it (wong 
et al. 2014, 300). 

conclusions 
the papers in cmss us immigration reform collection outline an immigration system that 
furthers the nations interests, reflects its values, and takes into account the perspectives of 
individuals and communities most affected by us policies. several themes  along with 
dozens of policy proposals  emerge from these papers. 
first,  immigration  policymaking  should  be  embedded  in  a  larger  set  of  partnerships, 
processes, and commitments that respond to the conditions that force persons to migrate. 
second,  the  us  immigration  system  should  reflect  liberal  democratic  values  and  an 
inclusive vision of national identity. effective and humane policies require engaged and 
active citizens. as the papers illustrate, elected officials on national, state, and local levels, 
as well as civil society institutions, can all influence immigration policy for better or worse. 
third,  it  is  incumbent  on  policy  and  opinion  makers  to  publicize  the  broad  national 
interests served by us immigration policies. policymakers should, in turn, evaluate and 
adjust these policies based on their success in furthering the nations interests. the united 
states cannot advance any of the interests served by its immigration system without sound 
legal immigration policies. thus, legal immigration reform must be the cornerstone of the 
us immigration reform agenda. 
fourth,  the  united  states  should  prioritize  the  gathering  and  dissemination  of  the  best 
available evidence on migration and on the nations migration-related needs and programs, 
and should use this information to respond flexibly to changing migration patterns and new 
economic  developments.  such  evidence  would  include  research  on  the  knowledge  and 
perspectives of the most affected individuals and communities. 
fifth,  immigrant  integration  strengthens  communities  and  represents  an  important, 
overarching metric for us immigration policies. the successful integration of the united 
states 43 million foreign-born residents and their progeny should be a national priority. 
the papers argue for a robust commitment to immigrant integration from the perspectives 
of immigrants, families, us workers, and host communities.
sixth, an immigration federalism agenda should prioritize cooperation on shared federal, 
state, and local priorities. it should also recognize:
 
 

the federal governments enforcement obligations; 
the interests of local communities in the safety, well-being, and participation of their 
residents; 
the  importance  of  federal  leadership  in  resolving  the  challenge  posed  by  the  us 
undocumented population; and
the need for civil society institutions to serve as mediators of immigrant integration.

 
seventh, immigration reform must be coupled with strong, well-enforced labor standards 

 

568

journal on migration and human securityin  order  to  promote  that  nations  interest  in  fair  wages  and  safe  and  healthy  working 
conditions for us workers.
eighth, fairness and due process should characterize us admission, custody, and removal 
decisions. a system that honored due process and fundamental fairness would minimize 
the use of detention, provide legal representation at no cost to indigent and other vulnerable 
persons, create a well-funded article 1 immigration court, and eliminate non-court removals. 
ninth, family unity should remain a central goal of us immigration policy and a pillar of 
the us immigration system. family-based immigration furthers a core national interest 
(intact families), contributes necessary workers, and facilitates immigrant integration. 
tenth, the united states should seek to craft win-win immigration policies that serve 
its  own  interests  and  those  of  migrant-sending  states.  such  policies  will  enjoy  broad 
acceptance and be more likely to achieve their purposes.  
eleventh, us immigration law and policy should be coherent and consistent, and the united 
states should offer legal migration opportunities to persons uprooted due to us foreign 
interventions, trade policies, and us immigration laws. coherence also demands effective 
policymaking and good governance. to that end, the collection raises several governance 
imperatives, including the need to: 
  mainstream immigration and refugee concerns into other policymaking processes; 
 
  make immigrant integration a unifying national priority; and
  build an immigration federalism agenda rooted, in part, in shared federal, state, and 

link immigration reform with strengthened labor standards enforcement; 

local immigration priorities. 

twelfth, the united states should reduce the size of its undocumented population through 
a  substantial  legalization  program,  and  seek  to  ensure  that  this  population  never  again 
approximates its current size. this need represents a recurrent theme in this collection of 
papers. the authors support a legalization program to preserve us families, to strengthen 
the economy, to further immigrant integration, to promote labor standards enforcement, 
to  reduce  nativism,  to  create  coherent  laws,  to  ease  the  burdens  on  the  immigration 
enforcement system, and to recognize the equitable ties of undocumented persons to the 
united states.

