unfulfilled promises, future 
possibilities: the refugee 
resettlement system in the united 
states

anastasia brown
united states conference of catholic bishops

 todd scribner
united states conference of catholic bishops

executive summary
world  war  ii  caused  the  displacement  of  millions  of  people  throughout 
europe. in response, the united states initiated a public-private partnership 
that assisted in the resettlement of hundreds of thousands of the regions 
displaced persons. for nearly 40 years after the war, the us commitment 
to refugee resettlement played out in an ad hoc fashion as it responded 
to emerging crises in different ways. during this period the governments 
involvement with resettlement became gradually intertwined with that of 
nongovernmental resettlement agencies, which came to play an increasingly 
vital  role  in  the  resettlement  process.  the  budding  relationship  that 
began in the middle decades of the twentieth century set the foundation 
for an expansive and dynamic public-private partnership that continues 
to this day. the refugee act of 1980 solidified the relationship between 
resettlement  agencies  and  the  federal  government,  established  political 
asylum  in  us  law,  and  created  the  refugee  resettlement  program  and 
a series of assistance programs to help refugees transition to life in the 
united states. this legislation marked a decisive turning point in the field 
of refugee resettlement. 
since passage of the act, the united states has resettled more than two 
million refugees, providing them with the opportunity to start a new life.  
nevertheless,  almost  as  soon  as  it  was  established,  federal  backing  for 
the domestic resettlement program began to erode, placing the program 
under increasing stress. financial and programmatic support was quickly 
reduced because of budgetary pressures and a changing political climate 
in washington, dc. administrative control of the program was assigned 
to federal agencies that are responsible for different facets of the process. 
however,  coordination  and  information  sharing  between  these  agencies 
and with resettlement agencies has been less than optimal. the lack of 

 2014 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 2 number 2 (2014): 101-120adequate  support  for  the  resettlement  program  has  placed  substantial 
strain  on  refugee  receiving  communities  and  on  resettlement  agencies. 
receiving communities have experienced particular strain as a result of 
secondary migration and a lack of resources to assist in refugee integration. 
in light of these issues, this paper highlights specific improvements that 
could be made to the domestic resettlement program that would ensure 
that the united states will remain in a strong position to welcome refugees 
for years to come.  

introduction
the  united  nations  high  commissioner  for  refugees  (unhcr)  estimates  that  at  the 
close  of  2012  there  were  approximately  15.4  million  refugees  worldwide  (unhcr 
2013b). the international community has traditionally promoted three durable solutions 
to displacement: voluntary repatriation, integration into the country of first asylum, and 
resettlement  to  a  third  country.  voluntary  repatriation  is  the  preferred  option  since  it 
signifies that the original cause for displacement has subsided to the point that it is safe for 
the refugee to return home. however, with the threat of continued persecution or ongoing 
conflict, it may be best for the refugee to remain in the country of first asylum and integrate 
into the local community. if remaining in the country of first asylum is not viable because 
of local resistance, lack of economic capacity, or another reason, resettlement to a third 
country might be the only realistic solution. despite the need for third country resettlement, 
potential host countries have too often failed to live up to their moral responsibility to 
provide resettlement opportunities to refugee populations who otherwise remain mired in 
makeshift camps and urban centers around the world.   
the united states became proactive in the resettlement of displaced persons following 
the end of world war ii, and in response to other refugee crises that emerged in cuba, 
southeast asia,  and  eastern  europe  in  later  decades.  until  the  passage  of  the  refugee 
act of 1980, the united states admitted refugees on an ad hoc basis. the act codified 
the definition of a refugee and the right to asylum into us law consistent with the 1951 
united nations convention relating to the status of refugees. it established a standardized 
admissions process that emphasizes special humanitarian concerns, and created a series 
of assistance programs that would help refugees transition into their new life in america 
(anker and posner 1981, 11). since the acts passage, the united states has resettled more 
than two million refugees. every year since 1994 it has resettled more refugees than all 
other  states  of  the  organization  for  economic  cooperation  and  development  (oecd) 
combined (kerwin 2012, 5). given the numbers of refugees resettled and the lives saved as 
a consequence, it is reasonable to argue that the system put into place by the refugee act 
of 1980 has largely been a success. 
the refugee act of 1980 provided a solid foundation for building a robust resettlement 
system.  yet in the thirty years since the acts passage, the united states has not fully 
lived up to its obligations under the law. many stakeholders have identified the need for 
comprehensive analysis of the strengths and weaknesses of the resettlement program. in 

102

journal on migration and human security2003 the us state department commissioned a study by david martin1 on the refugee 
admissions  system  which  covered  issues  related  to  the  identification  and  processing  of 
refugee populations overseas (martin 2005).  in 2011 the national security staff (nss) 
completed  an  administrative  review  of  the  domestic  side  of  the  resettlement  process 
which made recommendations for enhanced interagency coordination. the government 
accountability  office  (gao)  has  also  analyzed  the  resettlement  process  and  provided 
periodic reports highlighting both the strengths and weaknesses of the system. in addition, 
recent  studies  by  private  organizations  have  identified  the  need  to  commission  further 
analysis on the institutional structures, relationships, processes and funding of the domestic 
resettlement program (brick et al. 2010).  many of these studies have examined elements 
of the domestic resettlement program including the reception, placement and integration 
of refugees, which could bolster a larger, comprehensive assessment (nezer 2013; human 
rights first 2012; irc 2009; georgetown university law center 2009; lirc 2009). 
this paper argues for specific reforms that would allow the resettlement system to live up to 
its unfulfilled promise and that would realign it with the vision set forth in the refugee act 
of 1980.  beginning in the post-world war ii period, federal refugee resettlement programs 
became increasingly intertwined with the work of nongovernmental, humanitarian agencies. 
the passage of the refugee act signified a high point in this progression and delineated 
the roles and responsibilities of the federal government and private organizations in the 
resettlement process. at the core of the act is the goal of helping refugees become self-
sufficient. however, self-sufficiency has become narrowly defined and, in any event, the 
system has failed to provide the necessary resources to further this objective.  in addition, 
breakdowns in coordination and information sharing on multiple levels have undermined 
the program.  

from world war ii to the refugee act of 1980
due to the violent disruptions brought on by world war ii and the proliferation of political, 
religious, and ethnic persecution during that period, millions of men, women, and children 
living in europe were displaced from their homes and forced to flee in search of safety 
elsewhere. while the resettlement of european refugees began in earnest in the post-war 
period,  the  federal  government  and  voluntary  organizations  began  to  coordinate  their 
refugee resettlement work as early as the late 1930s. these early efforts planted the seeds 
for the public-private partnership that blossomed in later decades as their activities became 
more closely intertwined. this growing relationship often advanced on the heels of newly 
emergent refugee crises, thus providing the springboard for further development of the 
system.
at the height of world war ii president roosevelt established the war relief control board, 
which became the official liaison between the federal government and voluntary agencies 
interested  in  providing  humanitarian  support  overseas,  including  in  matters  related  to 
displaced populations. a complementary organization, the american council of voluntary 

1  david martin, warner-booker distinguished professor of international law at the university of virginia, 
has served as principal deputy general counsel of the department of homeland security and, previously, as 
general counsel to the immigration and naturalization service. 

103

the refugee resettlement system in the united statesagencies in foreign service (acva)which was itself an early precursor to the refugee 
council usa and interaction2was established to coordinate relief activities among the 
voluntary agencies and function as an interlocutor between member organizations and the 
federal government. in a series of meetings convened to discuss the problem of displaced 
persons  in  europe  in  the  mid-1940s,  members  of  the  acva,  which  included  jewish, 
catholic, and protestant groups, recognized the need for government funding and support 
if the united states was going to play an important role in responding to this problem. 
the refugee crisis confronting these organizations far exceeded the reach of their private 
resources; government support was not only expected but assumed (nichols 1998, 61-
8). contrary to expectations, federal funding was not immediately forthcoming as some 
influential government officials remained resistant to the resettlement of european refugees 
in the united states. 
expansive  resettlement  efforts  did  not  take  place  until  three  years  after  the  war  ended 
with the passage of the displaced persons act of 1948, but consolidation of the public- 
private  partnership  began  during  the  intervening  period.  the  turning  point  came  with 
president trumans executive order on december 22, 1945 that prioritized the resettlement 
of displaced persons, and orphaned children in particular. while only marginally effective 
as a tool for resettlementit led to the admission of only 38,000 displaced persons over 
a three year period the directive instituted an important change in the way voluntary 
organizations  coordinated  their  work  with  the  federal  government  in  the  resettlement 
process.  previously,  migrants,  including  refugee  populations,  had  to  be  sponsored  for 
resettlement into the united states by a financially competent individual to ensure that they 
would not become a public charge. following trumans directive, humanitarian agencies 
were for the first time allowed to become the sponsoring agencies of refugees. in this role, 
they provided guarantees that resettled refugees would not become public charges. the 
directive also mandated that these agencies cover the cost of travel across the atlantic 
and provide for the displaced upon their arrival, so that the immediate cost of resettlement 
would not be borne by us taxpayers (truman 1945).
under  the  law  at  the  time,  there  was  no  legal  distinction  between  a  refugee  and  an 
immigrant; any refugee who was admitted into the united states entered under the quota 
for his or her country of origin. given the stringent nature of the quota system, proponents 
of the resettlement of displaced persons urged congress to pass emergency legislation 
that would allow for more robust resettlement. the displaced persons act of 1948the 
preeminent example of such emergency legislation in the post-war periodprovided for 
the  admission  of  202,000  displaced  persons  over  a  period  of  two  years.  in  contrast  to 
trumans 1945 directive, the cost of travel from europe to the port of entry was covered 
by the federal government. however, humanitarian agencies were expected to provide for 
the needs of refugees after their arrival, including fronting the cost of travel from the port 
of entry to the final destination through loans paid by the refugee once they began earning 
money (curtin 1952, 59). with a broadening scope of responsibilities, agencies involved in 

2  established in 2000, refugee council usa is a coalition of nongovernmental organizations (ngos) engaged 
in advocacy on behalf of the rights of refugees around the world and functions as the consultative forum for 
us-based agencies involved in resettlement work (http://www.rcusa.org/). established in 1984, interaction 
is an alliance of internationally-based ngos that focuses on improving conditions and opportunities for the 
worlds most poor and vulnerable (http://www.interaction.org/about). 

104

journal on migration and human securityresettlement began to develop an expansive national network.  the networks put into place 
to assist in the resettlement of displaced populations following the war formed the basis of 
these agencies work in later years (scribner 2013).
the  next  major  refugee  crisis  occurred  following  the  hungarian  uprising  in  1956.  in 
response to a national uprising for political reform, soviet troops launched a crackdown 
on protesters, killing thousands and forcing tens of thousands more to flee to yugoslavia 
and austria. to relieve some of the pressures of this influx on the austrian government, 
president eisenhower agreed to resettle some 35,000 hungarian refugees into the united 
states  (coriden  1996).  as  with  the  displaced  persons  crisis  following  world  war  ii, 
humanitarian agencies functioned as important actors in the resettlement process. unlike 
earlier efforts, the federal government agreed to pay humanitarian agencies a total of $1.5 
million dollars, or approximately $40 dollars per refugee, to assist in the process. federal 
authorities  soon  thereafter  issued  a  letter  informing  humanitarian  agencies  that  these 
payments do not constitute a precedent for giving payment to the voluntary agencies for 
similar costs for other refugee movements (zucker 1983, 173). while perhaps intended 
to be an isolated event, this precedent was later expanded and reinforced with the influx of 
cuban refugees.  
between january 1959 and december 1960, the united states admitted 100,000 cuban 
refugees who fled cuba following castros rise to power. federal authorities expected that 
the castro regime would soon collapse followed by a quick repatriation of cuban refugees. 
however, large numbers of incoming cubans soon required more support (scanlan and 
loescher  1983).  the  cuban  governments  decision  in  1960  to  confiscate  the  personal 
property of cubans who fled to the united states strained the resources of local agencies 
and led the us government to establish the cuban refugee emergency center in miami, 
florida. president kennedy allocated $5 million dollars for the center to help care for cuban 
arrivals. the president subsequently commissioned the director of health, education, and 
welfare (hew) to establish a cuban refugee program. on june 28, 1962, the migration and 
refugee assistance act of 1962 was enacted and funds for the program were appropriated 
by congress. from 1961 through 1967 the government spent nearly $260 million dollars 
on  direct  support  for  refugees,  including  education,  employment,  health,  reception  and 
registration services of cuban nationals who arrived in miami (thomas 1967, 47-9).3
the decision to support incoming refugee populations was reinforced during the influx of 
indochinese refugees following the fall of saigon in 1975. the us department of state 
signed contracts with nine voluntary agencies and agreed to pay $500 (later $350) dollars 
per refugee to support the initial cost of relocation (silverman 1980, 29). the indochinese 
refugee assistance act, enacted on may 24, 1975, divided the administration of voluntary 
agency and state assistance funds between the department of state and hew. later that 
year, president ford deployed a specially-created task force in hew to help address some 
of  the  long-term  needs  of  refugees  in  the  community. this  resulted  in  the  release  of  a 
series of employment and training grants to the states which could be used to establish 
english language and vocational trainings, job placement programs, personal and family 

3  while independent of the us refugee admissions process, the cuban haitian entrant program continues 
to operate today as a public-private partnership between the department of homeland security and various 
nongovernmental organizations. 

105

the refugee resettlement system in the united statescounseling, and related programs for indochinese refugees. these grants aimed to ease 
some of the financial stresses on states (silverman 1980, 32). 
the  ad  hoc  nature  of  refugee  resettlement  and  the  de  facto  development  of  distinct 
resettlement programs that coincided with influxes of new refugee populations fostered 
inconsistencies in the program. for example, voluntary agencies resettling soviet refugees 
were eligible for a stipend of $1,100 dollars per refugee that was to be matched by $1,100 
dollars in private money, whereas agencies resettling indochinese refugees were eligible 
for a $500 dollar stipend with no match required (silverman 1980, 34). in testimony before 
the  us  senate  committee  on  the  judiciary  in  1979,  former  senator  dick  clarkthen 
newly appointed united states coordinator for refugee affairsexpressed the need for a 
permanent and consistent refugee policy to replace what he characterized as an inadequate 
patchwork of different programs that evolved in response to specific crises (kennedy 
1981).

the emphasis on early employment for self-sufficiency 
passage of the refugee act of 1980 standardized the system under which refugees were 
admitted,  clarified  the  objectives  of  the  program,  authorized  assistance  programs  that 
would be used to achieve these objectives, and delineated the roles and responsibilities 
of the various federal agencies involved in the process. one of the central objectives of 
the refugee resettlement system is to help refugees achieve self-sufficiency, which has 
traditionally been narrowly focused on finding employment and earning a total income that 
allows a family to support itself without the receipt of cash assistance from the state (brick 
et al. 2010). 
the act  had  originally  exempted  refugees  from  work  registration  requirements  for  the 
first 60 days, but in 1982 congress eliminated the exemption, thereby strengthening the 
connection between self-sufficiency and early employment for refugees (gao 1983, iii). 
prior to elimination of the exemption, the us department of health and human services/
office  of  refugee  resettlement  (dhhs/orr)  program  guidelines,  federal  agreements 
with resettlement agencies, and even the act itself did not make clear whether employment 
should be an immediate goal or something to be sought following the completion of available 
training (gao 1983, 22). following elimination of the exemption, finding employment 
as quickly as possible became the programs preeminent objective while other priorities 
set forth in the act, including english language and employment training programs, were 
marginalized.
the  almost  singular  emphasis  on  self-sufficiency  and  economic  independence,  while  a 
laudable objective, risks limiting opportunities for refugees to become accustomed to their 
new surroundings, find jobs appropriate to their skill sets, and access social services that 
could improve their long-term outcomes (brick et al. 2010, 11). furthermore, it overlooks 
a  more  robust  understanding  of  integration  which  includes  psycho-social,  linguistic, 
and  cultural  integration  (ott  2011,  10).  the  provision  of  more  resources  to  support  a 
comprehensive approach to integration would benefit refugees and receiving communities 
in the long-term. for example, language barriers can diminish employment opportunities 
and  impede  the  ability  of  refugees  to  navigate  complex  systems  such  as  healthcare  or 

106

journal on migration and human securityeffectively communicate with law enforcement officials in emergency situations (us senate 
committee on foreign relations 2010, 2). too frequently, training and recertification, and 
english language learning programs are underfunded or underprovided in a given locale 
(georgetown  university  law  center  2009,  22-26;  us  senate  committee  on  foreign 
relations 2010, 4-5). 
even  if  more  resources  were  targeted  to  employment  and  english  language  learning 
programs, highly educated refugees may still not be able to find employment that reflects 
their level of education or skills immediately after their arrival. to better address challenges 
associated with finding adequate employment, the refugee program could cover potential 
obstacles during pre-arrival orientation, engage in outreach and partnerships with potential 
employers,  and  develop  individualized  employment  plans  to  help  incoming  refugees 
strategize on necessary steps to achieve their employment objectives (unhcr 2013a, 27-
37). 
changes in the types of refugee flows over time can also complicate efforts to secure quick 
employment for incoming refugees. from the mid-1970s until the mid-1990s, at least three-
quarters of refugees coming to the united states were from the former soviet union or 
southeast asia. today, the united states processes refugees from over 60 countries around 
the world (dewey 2004). in 1990 nearly half (47 percent) of the refugees being resettled 
into the united states were from the soviet union and just over a quarter from vietnam, 
followed by laotian and romanian refugees as a distant third and fourth, respectively. in 
2010 the top four refugee flows were from iraq, burma, bhutan, and somalia, none of which 
contributed more than a quarter of that years total refugee flow (prm 2010). each ethnic 
group brings with it its own challenges, languages, and cultural norms that have to be taken 
into consideration when placing refugees in particular locales and seeking employment 
opportunities for them. organizations such as the center for applied linguistics, which 
offers  a  wide  array  of  resources  related  to  cultural  orientation,  should  be  even  further 
enhanced and utilized within the resettlement system.
finally,  different  government  agencies  serve  competing  objectives.  on  the  one  hand, 
the  primary  objective  of  the  bureau  of  population,  refugees  and  migration  (prm)  of 
the state department is to resettle the most vulnerable refugee populations. on the other 
hand, orr has as its primary goal the promotion of self-sufficiency and integration, 
which  in  practice  means  finding  employment  that  will  allow  a  refugee  to  live  without 
government support.  however, it is the most vulnerable refugee populationsincluding 
those  who  have  been  severely  traumatized  or  experienced  physical  injuriesthat  face 
the most significant obstacles to attaining self-sufficiency and integrating into receiving 
communities, particularly within the context of a weak economic climate (kerwin 2012, 
9). 

the  role  of  federally-funded  transitional  assistance 
programs
although self-sufficiency through early employment is one of the fundamental goals of the 
resettlement process, the drafters of the refugee act recognized that there would be a period 
of transition into a new life in the united states. two primary streams of funding provide 

107

the refugee resettlement system in the united statessupport  for  the  resettlement  process,  the  first  of  which  is  the  state  department-funded 
reception and placement (r&p) program. the r&p program provides initial support for 
the immediate needs of refugees for up to the first 90 days after arrival and offsets the costs 
borne by resettlement agencies. as of january 2010, the state department doubled the r&p 
grant from $900 dollars to $1,800 dollars per refugee. at least $1,100 dollars of this amount 
must be used for direct support to the refugee, while up to $700 dollars of the remaining 
assistance can be used to offset program management costs (department of state 2010).4 
the second primary source of funding is a series of transitional assistance programs that are 
funded by orr. several programs, including employment-related services, refugee cash 
assistance (rca), and refuge medical assistance (rma) are available for financially 
eligible refugees. while well-intentioned, funding levels for these programs have failed 
to keep pace with the needs of refugees and local communities or have been reduced over 
time.  reduction  in  resettlement  assistance  has  resulted  in  shifting  the  responsibility  to 
provide cash and medical benefits from the federal to state governments (gao 1990, 5). 
this section examines how this has played out in the case of the rca and rma programs 
in particular.
at  the  time  of  the  refugee  acts  enactment,  refugees  who  otherwise  qualified  for 
supplemental security income (ssi), aid to families with dependent children (afdc), 
or  medicaid  were  eligible  to  receive  these  forms  of  assistance.  refugees  who  met  the 
financial qualifications to participate in these federally funded social service programs but 
did not qualify because of family composition, age, or disability, were still able to receive 
rca and/or rma benefits (holman 1996, 20). for example, non-elderly childless adults 
were  traditionally  unqualified  to  receive  medicaid.  in  such  cases,  a  financially  eligible 
refugee, while not qualifying to receive medicaid, would qualify to receive rma benefits 
for a prescribed period (bruno 2011). in addition, the act committed the federal government 
to provide a 100 percent reimbursement to cover the cost borne by the state for refugees 
who qualified for and participated in state-level social assistance programs for the first 36 
months in the united states. rca and rma were provided to the refugee for the same time 
period. 
almost from the outset, the federal government began to curtail the benefits provided to 
refugees. on april 1, 1982, the period of rca and rma support was reduced to 18 months. 
it was further reduced in october 1991 to eight months, where it remains today. the initial 
reduction to the rca and rma programs was due in large part to government concerns 
that refugee service providers viewed the programs as guaranteed entitlements that deterred 
refugees from seeking employment opportunities (holman 1996, 22-24). in other words, 
there was a growing concern among political leaders that cash and medical assistance were 
forms of welfare that inhibited self-sufficiency rather than transitional support aimed at 
establishing a refugee in the local and national community. 
the  identification  of  refugee  assistance  as  a  form  of  welfare  altered  the  way  in  which 
segments  of  the  american  public  perceived  recently-arrived  refugees.  instead  of 
recognizing financial and medical support for these communities as transitional assistance 
meant to help refugees acclimate to a new homelandas they should be understoodthe 

4  subsequent to doubling r&p assistance, the state department has instituted periodic increases to the total 
amount provided, bringing the total amount at the time of this essay to $1,875 dollars per refugee.

108

journal on migration and human securityuse of assistance became viewed by some as a form of dependence (haines 2010). a report 
issued by the gao in 1983 highlighted these concerns. focusing on the newly arriving 
indochinese  refugee  population,  which  remained  one  of  the  largest  refugee  streams  in 
the years following the act, the gao expressed concerns that the welfare dependency 
of this group had been consistently high since the time of their arrival. the report further 
noted that although some refugees might need continued public assistance, it could create 
a disincentive to seeking early employment (gao 1983, 16).5
this  perspective  was  rooted  in  larger,  far  reaching  changes  in  the  political  climate 
concerning the governments role in american life. by the early 1980s, a conservative 
shift in american politics, which was generally antagonistic toward government spending 
on social programs, had become ascendant. consequently, federal funding for many social 
welfare, job training, and education initiatives was either cut or completely eliminated, 
while other programs were folded into block grants to states (zucker 1983, 181). 
partly a consequence of this shift, reimbursements of the states share of the cost of the 
afdc and ssi program expenses were cut. early efforts to reduce this funding surfaced 
with  the  passage  of  the  balanced  budget  emergency  and  deficit  control act  of  1985, 
popularly known as gramm-rudman. one of the primary purposes of gramm-rudman was 
to institute controls on spending that would result in a balanced budget by 1991. to achieve 
the required cuts, the refugee program shortened the time frame during which federal funds 
would be used to cover the state share for afdc, medicaid, and ssi (holman 1996, 22). 
the first reduction was to 31 months in may 1986 and was progressively whittled down to 
zero months by october 1990. 
a report issued by the gao in 1990 noted that between 1985 and 1989 dhhss assistance 
per  refugee  declined  48  percent  from  $6,921  to  $3,600  in  absolute  dollars.  the  gao 
estimated that in 1990 the total cost that was shifted from the federal government to the 
states was around $85 million dollars. reductions in federal funding resulted not only in 
service cutbacks in english language and job training programs, but also increased waiting 
periods for access to available programs, particularly in california and other states with 
large refugee populations (gao 1990, 110). critical of the federal governments failure 
to provide the resources necessary to properly fund the resettlement system, director of the 
california department of social services walter barnes noted that:

these cuts show the inability or unwillingness of congress and the administration to 
meet the commitments laid out in the refugee act of 1980. the constant eating away 
at resources is, im afraid, going to eat away public support for the refugee program. 
(pear 1989, e4)

in 1996 the house subcommittee on immigration and claims of the committee of the 
judiciary held a hearing to address some of the shortcomings of the resettlement system 
and discuss ways to better enable refugees to become self-sufficient. in written testimony, 

5  more recent changes to the welfare system, and in particular the passage of the personal responsibility 
and work opportunity reconciliation act in 1996 have significantly reconfigured the eligibility requirements 
for federal public benefits. while refugees remain qualified to receive some benefits, the limited time period 
for which these benefits are available to them has largely obviated concerns about keeping refugees off of 
welfare.   

109

the refugee resettlement system in the united statesrepresentative gary condit (d-ca) claimed that while federal funding was used in his 
district to support language learning programs, employment and skills training, and provide 
cash assistance to refugees, federal dollars dried up quickly, placing strain on the local 
economy.  he lamented that, despite the fact that in the past the federal government has 
made commitments to fully support refugee resettlement, this commitment has not been 
met for many years, and argued that it was unconscionable for the federal government to 
place refugees in communities without providing resources for their resettlement.6 
a  2010  report  by  the  us  senate  committee  on  foreign  relations  concluded  that  the 
resettlement efforts in many us cities are underfunded, overstretched, and failing to meet 
the basic needs of the refugee populations and recommended that the federal government 
do more to support and resource the local communities (us senate committee on foreign 
relations 2010, 1). 
the arrival of large numbers of refugees paired with the failure of the federal government to 
adequately fund the domestic refugee programs can place strain on receiving communities. 
backlash  against  the  refugee  resettlement  program  has  become  more  pronounced  in 
recent  years  in  the  context  of  high  unemployment  and  budget  shortfalls.  tennessee, 
new hampshire, and georgia have taken legislative and executive action to try to stop 
resettlement into their states. in manchester, new hampshire, for example, mayor ted 
gatsas requested that prm impose a moratorium on refugee resettlement. he expressed 
concern over the living conditions of refugees and the lack of employment opportunities 
available to them. in response, prm reduced the number of refugees resettled in manchester 
from three hundred to two hundred, but refused to impose an across-the-board moratorium. 
a state bill to establish a moratorium passed the house, but failed to get enough votes in 
the senate (nezer 2013, 12).
even in areas where executive or legislative efforts were not pursued at the state level, 
local  communities  have  experienced  a  backlash  against  refugees.  in  2008  city  officials 
in  ft.  wayne,  indiana  requested  a  moratorium  on  resettlement  from  the  state  family 
social  services administration.  in  their  letter  of  request,  officials  complained  that  the 
ongoing resettlement of burmese refugees had resulted in a significant burden on the local 
community. while admitting that the local catholic charities worked extremely hard in the 
initial months following resettlement, it argued that after the first six months the burden 
of assimilation, care and absorption falls on the local communityschools, hospitals, and 
numerous non-profits (us senate committee on foreign relations 2010, 20). 
despite  these  concerns,  refugees  substantially  contribute  to  local  communities.  for 
example, a 2013 study on the impact of refugee resettlement in cleveland, ohio contradicted 
many of the negative stereotypes applied to refugees. the study found that in 2012 the 
total  contribution  of  refugees  to  the  local  economy  was  $48  million  dollars,  including 
approximately $2.7 million dollars in tax revenue, and that in the last decade 38 businesses 
were launched by refugees, which by 2012 employed 141 people (chmura economics and 
analytics 2013, 2-5). the study also noted that after two years in cleveland  only eight 
percent of refugee households are still receiving public assistance (smith 2013). further 

6  condit, gary a. statement to the house, possible shifting of refugee resettlement to private organizations, 
hearing on the subcommittee of immigration and claims on the committee on the judiciary, august 1, 1996.

110

journal on migration and human securitystudies should highlight features and potential reforms to the refugee system that would 
enhance the contributions of refugees to local communities.

funding and its effect on refugee resettlement agencies 
the failure to provide sufficient resources and inadequate long-term planning by federal 
agencies, alongside stresses brought by local backlash against the resettlement system, has 
had a corrosive effect on the resettlement agency network. a study on the role of faith-
based resettlement agencies found that there was widespread concern regarding the needs 
of refugee communities being resettled and the availability of resources with which to do 
so. it noted that resettlement agency staff repeatedly expressed frustration that financial 
and other resources were never adequate to address the needs of their clients  (nawyn 
2006, 54). newly arrived refugees, especially those who do not have family living in the 
united states, are particularly dependent on the support of resettlement agencies and local 
charities. 
in 2008 lutheran immigration and refugee service (lirs) conducted a cost analysis of the 
refugee resettlement services required by the state department and with respect to the r&p 
program. in 2008 the per-person funding related to r&p provided by the state department 
was $850 dollars, half of which had to be spent on the needs of the refugees. in particular, 
the study examined the direct cost of ensuring basic needs as well as providing orientation 
and case management by front line staff and volunteers prior to refugee arrival and during 
the first 90 days (lirs 2008, 6). the study found that the federal contribution amounted 
to only 39 percent of the total cost accrued during this period. the remainder of the expense 
had to be covered by in-kind donations, volunteer hours, and direct contributions by the 
lirs affiliate agencies. 
according to a report by the us senate committee on foreign relations, the failure to 
increase funding over time in order to meet the needs of arriving refugees has significantly 
strained the resettlement system. in fact, the decades-old grant level had declined by more 
than 50 percent in real terms due to inflation (us senate committee on foreign relations 
2010). failing to adequately fund the costs associated with the system places a significant 
amount of stress on the resettlement agencies ability to do their job effectively; it is crucial 
that federal funding keep pace with the costs associated with the program. failing to do so 
could in the long-term undermine the capacity of the system to continue functioning at a 
high level. 
the significant drop in the number of refugees admitted into the united states following 
the september 11, 2001 terrorist attacks illustrates how a decrease in federal funding can 
affect the stability of resettlement agencies. in 2000, the united states resettled 68,921 
refugees. in contrast, the united states admitted only 27,131 in 2002 and 28,403 in 2003 
(bruno 2013, 3). by 2004 the numbers had begun to increase, but still felt short of the 
average  annual  admissions  in  the  pre-9/11  period.  consequently,  the  level  of  federal 
funding distributed to resettlement agencies, which is tied to the number of refugees being 
resettled, was significantly affected. fifty-eight percent of nongovernmental resettlement 
agencies were forced to cut staff and 25 percent had to release more than a quarter of their 
employees (nawyn 2006). 

111

the refugee resettlement system in the united statessince  2011  prm  has  begun  to  issue  a  percentage  of  funding  based  on  the  predicted  
number of refugee arrivals, thereby allowing agencies to have a degree of predictability 
when  planning  their  budgets.  despite  this  important  advance,  the  nature  of  the  system 
and  the  dependence  of  agencies  on  government  funding  expose  them  to  volatility  and 
unpredictability.
more recently, debates in congress over the national debt, and particularly with respect 
to  sequestration,  could  imperil  the  resettlement  system.  sequestration  puts  into  place 
automatic, across-the-board spending cuts to government programs aimed at instituting 
$1.5  billion  dollars  in  deficit  reduction  over  fiscal  years  2012-2021.  some  of  those 
consequences are already being felt. according to san diego catholic charities director 
of refugee services michael mckay, the sequestration caused the loss of a $15,000 dollar 
program that would have helped place refugees in jobs during the first four months of their 
arrival (burks 2013). financial pressures, paired with unreliable funding levels from one 
fiscal year to the next, have burdened an already stressed system and have contributed 
to the closure of various sites across the resettlement network. the resettlement network 
connected to the united states conference of catholic bishops, for example, has witnessed 
the closure of resettlement agencies in the past few years in fresno, ca; memphis, tn; 
atlantic city, nj; trenton, nj; allentown, pa; wichita, ka; honolulu, hi; guam; and 
dodge city, ka. 
compounding  the  strain  on  resettlement  agencies  is  the  tendency  for  new  cooperative 
agreements  to  include  requirements  that  result  in  increased  workload  and  related  costs 
that are often borne by resettlement agencies. most recently, for example, prm issued a 
requirement that quarterly consultations be held between local stakeholders who are involved 
in the resettlement process as a way to better coordinate. according to the requirement, 
the  affiliate(s)  responsible  for  refugee  placement  shall  convene  and  conduct  quarterly 
consultations with state and local government officials concerning the sponsorship process 
and the intended distribution of refugees in such localities before their placement in those 
localities (bartlett 2013). 
while the intention behind these meetings is laudableto make sure that agencies involved 
in the resettlement process at the state level are working togetherthe responsibility for 
planning and implementing them should lie with the federal government as specified in 
the refugee act. the federal government has the clout to ensure that all interested parties 
will attend such meetings and has the capacity to explain in detail the dynamics of the 
resettlement system. the refugee act specifies that the orr director and the associated 
federal  agency  will  consult  with  local  and  state  governments,  and  voluntary  agencies,7 
and stipulates that the director shall provide for a mechanism whereby representatives 
of local affiliates of voluntary agencies regularly (not less often than quarterly) meet with 
representatives of state and local governments to plan and coordinate in advance of their 
arrival the appropriate placement of refugees among the various states and localities.8
secondary migration
refugees may choose to pursue secondary migration following arrival to the united states 
7  refugee act of 1980  2(a), pub. l. no. 96-212, 94 stat. 102 (1980).
8  refugee act of 1980  2(c)(ii), pub. l. no. 96-212, 94 stat. 102 (1980).

112

journal on migration and human securityfor a variety of reasons, including reunification with family located in another region or 
the lure of better financial opportunities elsewhere. secondary migration can exacerbate 
the pressures that promote backlash against refugee communities and it can increase the 
strain  on  local  social  service  networks  and  resettlement  agencies.  the  placement  of  a 
refugee in a specific locale is made by a resettlement agency after taking into consideration 
a wide range of factors (e.g., employment opportunities, language resources, and health 
needs). unfortunately, if refugees relocate to other cities seeking more support or better 
job opportunities, resettlement assistance often lags behind or becomes difficult to access 
(georgetown university law center 2009, 35).  refugee benefits vary greatly between 
states and sometimes between counties in the nations decentralized system. a more flexible 
set of benefits allowing for money to follow a refugee would go a long way in addressing 
this problem.
in 2009 orr commissioned a report on secondary migration, but its findings were never 
released. the author of the report later noted that: 

there was a growing interest in learning more about what was happening related to 
secondary refugee migration, including how both refugees and receiving communities 
were  faring  when  there  were  unexpected  influxes  of  refugees.  many  communities 
hadnt necessarily known that these newcomers were coming and were not always 
prepared for them. (ott 8)

putting  into  place  mechanisms  to  better  track  secondary  migration  and  provide  more 
flexibility in the refugee assistance program could help to alleviate some of the stresses 
that suddenly arise with the arrival of new and unexpected streams of migrants.
according to section 3 of the refugee act of 1980, orr is required to compile and 
maintain data on secondary migration of refugees within the united states. theoretically, 
orr has the capacity to trace secondary migration through a state reporting system. states 
are required to provide the number of refugees and entrants residing in their state that had 
initially been resettled in another state. but this information is generally only available if the 
refugee applies for services once they relocate. given that not all do, the state information 
is incomplete. furthermore, due to institutional and bureaucratic delays, by the time the 
orr registers one set of secondary migrants, a new set has already arrived (georgetown 
university law center 2009, 36).
a second way in which secondary migration could be tracked is through the refugee travel 
loan program. refugees traveling to the united states are provided an interest-free loan 
by the international organization for migration to cover their travel expenses and certain 
medical screenings. all refugees over the age of 18 sign a promissory note signifying their 
agreement to pay back the loan after they are resettled in the united states via monthly 
payments to the sponsoring agency. as refugees move from one locale to another, it could 
be possible to track secondary migration patterns through these payments. however, such 
information  is  not  always  immediately  available  to  resettlement  agencies.  nor  is  this 
information effectively shared between discrete organizations. thus, this approach would 
impose a substantial new responsibility on resettlement agencies. developing a centralized 
database to coordinate this information among the sponsoring agencies could also be costly.

113

the refugee resettlement system in the united statesa third option would be take advantage of an existing requirement that foreign nationals, 
including refugees, in the united states provide notice to the department of homeland 
security (dhs) within ten days of a move. prior to 9/11, this statute was rarely applied, 
although it has been on the books for years. due to national security concerns, this statute 
has been enforced more frequently in the post-9/11 era. using this mechanism to track 
secondary migration would require dhs to share the information with orr.  it would also 
require enforcement of a highly burdensome requirement. it is unclear whether or not dhs 
has a system in place to do so and if they would be interested in doing so. the overlapping 
missions of these federal departments dhss interest in national security and orrs 
humanitarian focuscould provide an obstacle to this kind of information sharing. 
the issue of information sharing and coordination between government agencies in the 
case of secondary migration is one example of a much bigger problem confronting the 
resettlement system.  a few areas are worth highlighting. 

coordination and information sharing
one  of  the  pressing  problems  of  the  refugee  resettlement  system  is  the  failure  of  the 
participating  agencies  to  share  information  adequately  at  each  stage  and  to  coordinate 
their activities efficiently. expanding the lines of communication between the international 
and  domestic  resettlement  arenas  could  help  to  streamline  the  process  and  help  avoid 
any  logistical  problems  after  the  refugee  arrives.  at  present,  overseas  screening  and 
adjudication  agencies  do  not  share  sufficient  information  with  domestic  resettlement 
entities (kerwin 2012, 13; nezer 2013, 17). 
information sharing between government agencies would be improved through coordinated, 
high-level oversight from the white house or the national security council. the refugee 
act  requires  the  president  to  appoint,  with  the  advice  and  consent  of  the  senate,  a 
coordinator for refugee affairs whose primary responsibilities include the development 
of overall united states refugee admission and resettlement policy and the coordination of 
all united states domestic and international refugee admission and resettlement programs 
in a manner that assures that policy objectives are met in a timely fashion.9 this position 
has the potential to streamline the entire resettlement process and to coordinate its many 
stages more effectively. 
a good deal of attention has been paid to the importance of sharing the medical information 
of refugees with resettlement agencies so that they can better prepare for their arrival and 
anticipate specific needs. one area that has not received as much attention is mental health. 
the emotional and psychological trauma that many refugees experience can have a long-
lasting impact on their well-being and the ability to integrate. a recent study noted that as 
many as 75 percent of iraqi refugees brought to the united states suffered from some form 
of mental illness. in many cases, illnesses have gone untreated. in other cases, treatment 
has been delayed. in addition, some community health professionals report that medical 
records  can  be  illegible  or  inadequate  for  diagnostic  purposes  (georgetown  university 
law center 2009, 32).

9  refugee act of 1980  2(c) (ii), pub. l. no. 96-212, 94 stat. 102 (1980). 

114

journal on migration and human securityanother area in which information sharing has proven inadequate is with respect to the 
condition of vulnerable populations. when refugees are being evaluated for resettlement, 
unhcr  develops  a  referral  for  resettlement  that  provides  an  in-depth  analysis  of  a 
refugees life and experiences. the analysis could include information related to sexual 
or physical abuse of children by someone in their community or family, torture, sexual 
assault,  and  other  forms  of  abuse.  the  state  department  does  not  normally  provide 
this information to resettlement agencies in advance of the refugees arrival because of 
confidentiality concerns. unhcr staff has expressed concern that information regarding 
at-risk  populations  does  not  always  reach  entities involved  in  the  resettlement process. 
a  recent  unhcr  study  recommended  that  domestic  resettlement  partners  should  be 
provided timely relevant information so that they can better understand the women-at-risk 
who are being (or going to be) resettled, and to enable them to prepare for and respond to 
the needs of these women once they arrive (unhcr 2013a, 4). if resettlement agencies 
could access this information earlier in the process, it could make it much easier for them 
to make placement decisions that might require special forms of support. 
orr should better align its funding mechanisms with the needs of communities that have 
to respond to influxes of new refugees. orr funding for grants and contracts in a given 
fiscal year are dispersed among the states based on the number of refugees who arrived 
within the previous 36 months and who continue to reside in each state at the beginning of 
the fiscal year. this approach fails to account for areas that experience significant increases 
in refugee arrivals in short periods of time. for example, between fiscal year 2006 and 2008 
arrivals to michigan increased by 400 percent and by 1,500 percent to detroit, specifically. 
but given orrs funding model, allocations for refugee social services in michigan only 
increased by approximately 72 percent from fy 2007 to fy 2009. the significant increase 
in refugees arriving in michigan between 2006 and 2008 was thus not accounted for in the 
funding that was provided (georgetown university law center 2009, 34). furthermore, 
the funding mechanism does not take into account new populations that are destined for 
areas of the country which have not received refugees in the last 36 months. in addition to 
revising the funding mechanism to address the situation of states that experience a rapid 
increase in new arrivals over a short period of time, more timely information sharing by 
the state department regarding future arrival projections could help orr better plan for 
capacity needs.
finally, coordination related to the resettlement planning process over the course of the 
yearfrom the state departments budget proposal through the presidential determination
would provide a greater degree of predictability to the resettlement process. the president 
generally produces a federal budget proposal in february, which requests allocations for 
the resettlement program. the results of the request are not released until the budget is 
subsequently submitted to the office of management and budget and to congress. the 
requested allocation for the resettlement program translates directly into the number of 
refugees that the federal government expects to bring to the united states in a given year.
none of this information is shared with the resettlement agencies, which must respond to 
a request for proposals (rfp) for the r&p program by the end of june. this process is 
centered on the expected capacity for each resettlement site including a detailed budget 
and placement plan for refugees arriving in the upcoming year. given that the required 

115

the refugee resettlement system in the united statesconsultation with congress and the presidential determination that sets the ceiling for the 
following fiscal years total admissions and regional allocations do not occur until after 
the rfp deadline, resettlement agencies are playing a guessing game as to how many will 
be admitted, who will be admitted, and from where. the consultation usually takes place 
sometime in september, which is months after the proposals for the r&p program are 
submitted for consideration. following the consultation with congress, the president issues 
the presidential determination that sets the final ceiling for that year (bruno 2013, 1).
while some information is available upon which resettlement agencies can base estimates, 
there are no authoritative figures to guide their proposals. it would be better if the proposals 
from the resettlement agencies were due after the presidents consultation with congress 
and if the consultation occurred more or less in tandem with budgetary proposals related 
to the resettlement program that the president submits to congress. this would require 
moving  the  consultation  back  from  september  to  late  february  or  march.  shifting  the 
schedule in this way would enable informed dialogue among community stakeholders at 
the local level related to incoming refugee populations and their needs. 
the presidential consultation with congress could rely more heavily on the data gathered 
in unhcrs annual publication, unhcr projected global resettlement needs, a product 
of the annual tripartite consultations on resettlement that occur every july. started in 
1995, the consultations determine the projected resettlement needs and priorities for the 
coming  year.  given  the  time  frame  required  to  process  a  single  refugee  from  point  of 
origin to resettlement in the united stateswhich can take one to two years or more
any refugee streams that emerge as a result of these consultations will likely not begin to 
arrive in the united states for at least the next couple of years. on september 30th of a 
given year there are often enough refugees that have proceeded far enough along in the 
refugee pipeline to cover almost all of the allotted slots for the next fiscal years refugee 
resettlement ceiling, which begins on october 1st. over the course of the new fiscal year, 
refugees are continually being processed for resettlement in future years. 
on the international front, requiring the state department to provide pertinent information 
in a timely manner to resettlement agencies regarding who is being processed would assist 
resettlement agencies to engage in long-term planning. on the domestic front, the federal 
government should provide information related to expected refugee populations that they 
plan to resettle for the following year much earlier than they currently do. it would be 
ideal to put into place and pass multi-year appropriations for the resettlement program 
which could cover future flows that are already in process. this would take much of the 
guesswork out of the domestic resettlement process and provide a much greater degree of 
predictability. multi-year appropriations would allow resettlement agencies to plan more 
carefully for the arrival of refugee flows and allow them to put into place the necessary 
resources for resettlement. 

conclusion
since  world  war  ii,  the  us  domestic  resettlement  system  has  evolved  from  one  that 
responded to crises in an ad hoc manner to an infrastructure that reflects an expansive 
and  dynamic  public-private  partnership  between  the  federal  government  and  voluntary 

116

journal on migration and human securityresettlement agencies. the united states has resettled millions of refugees, helped them 
to integrate, become financially and socially established, and begin their lives anew. more 
than three decades after the passage of the refugee act, cracks in the system have become 
apparent and the need to revisitso as to strengthenthe core objectives of the act has 
become crucial. this paper has highlighted ideas and reforms that would ensure that the us 
domestic resettlement system remains vibrant well into the future. 
while the federal government could make much needed reforms, resettlement agencies 
should also take responsibility for the systems continued vitality and engage in constant 
self-evaluation  to  determine  how  their  work  could  be  improved  upon  to  the  benefit  of 
refugees  and  receiving  communities.  the  resettlement  agencies  are  now  engaged  in  a 
process of examining what metrics each agency collects that are not required under federal 
grants. agencies supplement the work of the federal resettlement program in many different 
ways to strengthen the welcome of refugees. examining the results of these projects and 
compiling promising practices would strengthen the response of receiving communities 
across the united states.
resettlement agencies must also continue to expand and contract their networks in response 
to the needs of the incoming refugee populations and the local communities. this helps to 
relieve pressure in some areas that receive large numbers of refugees over short periods 
of time. it is also important that resettlement agencies take seriously the importance of 
public relations. lifting up the successes that occur in refugee communities every day and 
highlighting the contributions that refugees make to the larger national community could 
help to offset some of the backlash that has occurred in recent years at the local level. 

