seeking a rational approach to a 
regional refugee crisis: lessons 
from the summer 2014 surge 
of central american women and 
children at the us-mexico border

karen musalo1 
university of california hastings college of the law 
center for gender and refugee studies

eunice lee 
university of california hastings college of the law 
center for gender and refugee studies

executive summary2
in  the  early  summer  months  of  2014,  an  increasing  number  of  central 
american children alone and with their parents began arriving at the us-
mexico border in search of safety and protection. the children and families 
by and large came from the northern triangle countries of el salvador, 
honduras,  and  guatemala    three  of  the  most  dangerous  countries  in 
the  world    to  seek  asylum  and  other  humanitarian  relief.  rampant 
violence and persecution within homes and communities, uncontrolled and 
unchecked by state authorities, compelled them to flee north for their lives. 
on the scale of refugee crises worldwide, the numbers were not huge. for 
example, 24,481 and 38,833 unaccompanied children, respectively, were 
apprehended by us border patrol (usbp) in fy 2012 and fy 2013, while 
68,631  children  were  apprehended  in  fy  2014  alone  (usbp  2016a).  in 
addition, apprehensions of family units, or parents (primarily mothers) 
with children, also increased, from 15,056 families in fy 2013 to 68,684 
in fy 2014 (usbp 2016b).3 while these numbers may seem large and did 
represent  a  significant  increase  over  prior  years,  they  are  nonetheless 

1   the authors thank katrina myers for her excellent research support.  
2   this article was drafted and sent into production prior to the november 2016 us presidential elections 
and the inauguration of president donald j. trump. as a result, the recent policy changes of the trump 
administration are beyond the scope of this article. the authors continue to stand by their recommendations, 
rooted in the us governments international and domestic legal obligations towards refugees, as the proper 
course for the present day.
3usborderpatrol(usbp)definesafamilyunitasanindividualapprehendedwithoneormorefamily
members (usbp 2016b). thus, each family unit consists of two or more individuals. for example, usbp will 
countasonefamilyunitamotherapprehendedtogetherwithhertwochildren.

 2017 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 5 number 1 (2017): 137-179dwarfed  by  refugee  inflows  elsewhere;  for  example,  turkey  was  host  to 
1.15 million syrian refugees by year end 2014 (unhcr 2015a), and to 2.5 
million by year end 2015 (unhcr 2016)  reflecting an influx of almost 
1.5 million refugees in the course of a single year.
nevertheless,  small  though  they  are  in  comparison,  the  numbers  of 
central  american  women  and  children  seeking  asylum  at  our  southern 
border, concentrated in the summer months of 2014, did reflect a jump 
from prior years. these increases drew heightened media attention, and 
both news outlets and official us government statements termed the flow 
a surge and a crisis (e.g., basu 2014; foley 2014; negroponte 2014). 
the  sense  of  crisis  was  heightened  by  the  lack  of  preparedness  by  the 
federal government, in particular, to process and provide proper custody 
arrangements  for  unaccompanied  children  as  required  by  federal  law. 
images of children crowded shoulder to shoulder in us customs and border 
protection holding cells generated a sense of urgency across the political 
spectrum (e.g., fraser-chanpong 2014; tobias 2014). 
responses to this surge, and explanations for it, varied widely in policy, 
media,  and  government  circles.  two  competing  narratives  emerged, 
rooted in two very disparate views of the crisis. one argues that push 
factors in the home countries of el salvador, honduras, and guatemala 
drove children and families to flee as bona fide asylum seekers; the other 
asserted that pull factors drew these individuals to the united states. for 
those adopting the push factor outlook, the crisis is a humanitarian one, 
reflecting human rights violations and deprivations in the region, and the 
protection needs of refugees (unhcr 2015b; unhcr 2014; musalo et al. 
2015). while acknowledging that reasons for migration may be mixed, this 
view recognizes the seriousness of regional refugee protection needs. for 
those focusing on pull factors, the crisis has its roots in border enforcement 
policies that were perceived as lax by potential migrants, and that thereby 
acted as an inducement to migration (harding 2014; navarette, jr. 2014). 
each narrative, in turn, suggests a very different response to the influx of 
women and children at us borders. if push factors predominately drive 
migration, then protective policies in accordance with international and 
domestic legal obligations toward refugees must predominately inform us 
reaction. even apart from the legal and moral rightness of this approach, 
any long-term goal of lowering the number of central american migrants 
at the us-mexico border, practically speaking, would have to address the 
root causes of violence in their home countries. on the other hand, if pull 
factors are granted greater causal weight, it would seem that stringent 
enforcement  policies  that  make  coming  to  the  us  less  attractive  and 
profitable would be a more effective deterrent. in that latter case, tactics 
imposing human costs on migrants, such as detention, speedy return, or 
other harsh or cursory treatment  while perhaps not morally justified  
would at least make logical sense. 

138

journal on migration and human securityimmediately upon the summer influx of 2014, the obama administration 
unequivocally adopted the pull factor narrative and enacted a spate of 
hostile deterrence-based policies as a result. in july 2014, president obama 
asked congress to appropriate $3.7 billion in emergency funds to address 
the influx of central american women and children crossing the border 
(cohen 2014). the majority of funding focused on heightened enforcement at 
the border  including funding for 6,300 new beds to detain families (lirs 
and wrc 2014, 5). the budget also included, in yet another demonstration 
of a pull-factor-based deterrence approach, money for state department 
officials  to  counter  the  supposed  misinformation  spreading  in  central 
america regarding the possibility of obtaining legal status in the united 
states. the us government also funded and encouraged the governments 
of  mexico,  guatemala,  and  honduras  to  turn  around  central  american 
asylum seekers before they ever could reach us border (frelick, kysel, and 
podkul 2016).
each  of  these  policies,  among  other  harsh  practices,  continues  to  the 
present  day.  but,  by  and  large  they  have  not  had  a  deterrent  effect. 
although  the  numbers  of  unaccompanied  children  and  mothers  with 
children dropped in early 2015, the numbers began climbing again in late 
2015 and remained high through 2016, exceeding in august and september 
2015 the unaccompanied child and family unit apprehension figures for 
those same months in 2014 (usbp 2016a; usbp 2016b). moreover, that 
temporary drop in early 2015 likely reflects us interdiction policies rather 
than any deterrent effect of harsh policies at or within us own borders, 
as the drop in numbers of central american women and children arriving 
at the us border in the early months of 2015 corresponded largely with 
a spike in deportations by mexico (wola 2015). in all events, in 2015, 
unchr found that the number of individuals from the northern triangle 
requesting  asylum  in  mexico,  costa  rica,  nicaragua,  and  panama  had 
increased 13-fold since 2008 (unchr 2015b).
thus,  the  obama  administrations  harsh  policies  did  not,  in  fact,  deter 
central  american  women  and  children  from  attempting  to  flee  their 
countries.  this,  we  argue,  is  because  the  push  factor  narrative  is  the 
correct one. the crisis we face is accordingly humanitarian in nature and 
regional in scope  and the migrant surge is undoubtedly a refugee flow. 
by  refusing to  acknowledge  and  address  the reality  of the violence and 
persecution in el salvador, honduras, and guatemala, the us government 
has failed to lessen the refugee crisis in its own region. nor do its actions 
comport  with  its  domestic  and  international  legal  obligations  towards 
refugees.
this article proceeds in four parts. in the first section, we examine and 
critique the administrations pull-factor-based policies during and after 
the  2014  summer  surge,  in  particular  through  the  expansion  of  family 
detention, accelerated procedures, raids, and interdiction. in section two, 

139

seeking a rational approach to a regional refugee crisiswe look to the true push factors behind the migration surge  namely, 
societal violence, violence in the home, and poverty and exclusion in el 
salvador,  honduras,  and  guatemala.  our  analysis  here  includes  an 
overview of the united states responsibility for creating present conditions 
in these countries via decades of misguided foreign policy interventions. 
our penultimate section explores the ways in which our current deterrence-
based policies echo missteps of our past, particularly through constructive 
refoulement and the denial of protection to legitimate refugees. finally, we 
conclude by offering recommendations to the us government for a more 
effective approach to the influx of central american women and children 
at our border, one that addresses the real reasons for their flight and that 
furthers a sustainable solution consistent with us and international legal 
obligations  and  moral  principles.  our  overarching  recommendation  is 
that the us government immediately recognize the humanitarian crisis 
occurring in the northern triangle countries and the legitimate need of 
individuals from these countries for refugee protection. flowing from that 
core  recommendation  are  additional  suggested  measures,  including  the 
immediate  cessation  of  hostile,  deterrence-based  policies  such  as  raids, 
family  detention,  and  interdiction;  adherence  to  proper  interpretations 
of asylum and refugee law; increased funding for long-term solutions to 
violence  and  poverty  in  these  countries,  and  curtailment  of  funding  for 
enforcement;  and  temporary  measures  to  ensure  that  no  refugees  are 
returned to persecution in these countries. 

i. the obama administrations adoption of a pull factor 
narrative 
in response to the migration surge of central american women and children in summer 
2014, the obama administration immediately took a harsh stance and adopted a raft of 
punitive policies rooted in its pull factor narrative. despite the fact that heightened
numbers of asylum-seeking women and children continue to cross the us-mexico border 
even in the face of these policies, the us continued its deterrence-based approach. 
the  most  immediately  visible  and  hotly  contested  policy  response  was  the  rapid  and 
unprecedented  expansion  of  family  detention  along  the  southern  border.  capacity  for 
detaining families together  primarily mothers with their children  in us immigration 
custody expanded from less than a hundred beds in early 2014 to thousands by the end 
of the same year. a range of other deterrence-based policies also ensued, including the 
use of accelerated immigration proceedings for families and unaccompanied children in 
immigration courts, the increasing use of expedited removal of families, and raids of central 
american asylum seekers carried out in january and the summer of 2016. moreover, the 
united states has encouraged and funded the constructive refoulement of asylum seekers 
south of its own border, primarily through military and police funding for mexican and 
central american authorities, who turn back asylum seekers before they can reach the 
united  states  (frelick,  kysel,  and  podkul  2016).  in  addition,  as  discussed  in  section 
iii below, the obama administration restrictively interpreted substantive asylum law in 

140

journal on migration and human securitya continuing attempt to limit refugee protections, particularly with regard to the claims 
commonly made by individuals from the northern triangle of central america. 

1. family detention

at the beginning of 2014, a single 94-bed facility in berks county, pennsylvania was the 
only family immigration detention center in the united states. a larger family facility with 
512bedsintexas,thedont.huttofacility(hutto),hadoperatedfrom2006-2009,but
it  closed  down  following  heightened media  scrutiny,  a  human  rights  investigation, and 
litigation (lirs and wrc 2014, 5). media and human rights reports examining the texas 
facilitycriticized,inparticular,thenegativedevelopmentaleffectsofdetentiononchildren,
manyofwhomsufferedfromdepressionandweightloss(aba2015,14).alawsuitfiled
in 2007 highlighted inhumane conditions for families at hutto and alleged that the facility 
violated the terms of a 1997 settlement agreement in flores v. reno. that agreement required 
that children in immigration custody be held in the least restrictive setting possible, with 
a strong presumption favoring release to a parent or family member. the settlement also 
required state licensing for all us immigration and customs enforcement (ice) detention 
centers holding children. hutto, a converted medium security prison that formerly held 
adult male inmates, was not licensed to provide child care and was decidedly restrictive, 
with children and families treated like prisoners. restrictions included minimal freedom 
ofmovement,limitedaccesstooutdoorspace,andaninitialofferingofonlyonehourof
education a day for children (aba 2015, 14). in response to the lawsuit, ice agreed to 
make a number of changes to the facility in late 2007. following an internal assessment in 
early 2009 that highlighted the special needs of families (schriro 2009), the us department 
of homeland security (dhs) ultimately closed the facility in september 2009, converting 
it into a detention center for adult women only. 
thus, from 2009 to 2014, the only family detention center in operation was a small facility 
in berks county, which held both mothers and fathers with children. in response to the 
summer2014surgeoffamiliesarrivingattheus-mexicobordertoseekasylum,however,
dhs hastily opened a new facility in the remote town of artesia, new mexico  a 3.5-
hour drive away from the nearest legal service providers (aba 2015, 20). the 700-bed 
facility was originally a law enforcement training barracks that dhs quickly repurposed to 
house mothers with their children (aba 2015, 19). the facility opened in june 2014 and 
ranasadeportationmill(burnett2014);withinitsfirstfewweeksofoperation,over200
mothers and children were removed to the northern triangle (hylton 2015). the makeshift 
facility in artesia garnered criticism on a range of issues, including inadequate healthcare, 
social services, and access to counsel. in summer 2014, the aclu and other groups sued, 
alleging that the facility violated the due process and other rights of detained mothers and 
children.4 ice closed the artesia facility in december 2014, stating that it had been meant 
for temporary use. following this closure, the m.s.p.c. lawsuit was voluntarily dismissed.5
the expansion of family detention did not end with the artesia facilitys closing. rather, 
by august 2014, the private prison company geo group  the second-largest in america 

4   m.s.p.c. v. johnson, no. 14-01437 (aug. 22, 2014).
5   m.s.p.c. v. johnson, no. 14-01437 (jan.30, 2015).

141

seeking a rational approach to a regional refugee crisis had already begun to operate a large, 532-bed family detention center in karnes city, 
texas (aba 2015, 22). in december 2014, ice and geo group urged regulators to permit 
an expansion of the site of the prison, which increased the capacity of the karnes facility to 
1,158 beds. meanwhile, in dilley, texas, the corrections corporation of america (cca)  
thelargestprivateprisoncompanyinamericabeganoperationsatthesouthtexas
familyresidentialcenterindecember2014.the2,400-bedfacilityindilleyconsists
largely of connected trailer structures and has been compared to world war ii japanese 
internmentcamps(takei2015).bothfacilitiesholdmotherswithchildren;onlyberks
detains fathers and mothers with children.
overall,from2014tothepresentday,indirectresponsetotheinfluxofcentralamerican
families and children seeking asylum, the government rapidly expanded the capacity for 
family detention from less than 100 beds to over 3,500. the administration was explicit 
in its deterrence-based rationale for this unprecedented expansion of prison bed space. in 
testimony before the senate committee on appropriations in june 2014, dhs secretary 
jehjohnsonasserted,[t]hereareadultswhobroughttheirchildrenwiththem.again,
our message to this group is simple: we will send you back . . . last week we opened a 
detentionfacilityinartesia,newmexicoforthispurpose(johnson2014).sostrongwere
itsdeterrence-basedmotives,infact,theadministrationadoptedastrictno-releasepolicy
toward families in detention. pursuant to this policy, dhs generally refused to exercise its 
own discretion to release families locked away in dilley, karnes, and berks even after they 
established a likelihood of asylum eligibility. dhs additionally opposed release for these 
same families in bond hearings before immigration judges. a federal lawsuit, brought by the 
aclu,universityoftexaslawschoolsimmigrationclinic,andthelawfirmcovington
& burling resulted in a preliminary injunction against the no-release policy. the court in 
that case, r.i.l.r. v. johnson,reaffirmedthecivilnatureofimmigrationdetentionandthe
principle that blanket deterrence rationales  inherently punitive in nature  would likely 
violate long-standing constitutional principles on the permissible uses of civil detention.6 
following the issuance of the preliminary injunction, dhs backed down from its no-release 
policy and agreed to stop using blanket deterrence rationales in its own custody decisions 
as well as in bond hearings for asylum seeker families. however, dhs continues to detain 
large numbers of mothers with children in family detention centers. this failure to learn 
from the lessons of the past  and in particular, the negative impacts of its earlier operation 
of the hutto facility  has drawn heavy criticism and ongoing litigation (aba 2015). all 
three remaining family detention centers are the subject of lawsuits alleging violations of 
the 1997 flores settlement, which governs treatment of children in immigration detention.7 
its core provisions impose a strong presumption favoring release, and require that children 
who cannot be released be held in the least restrictive setting possible. the flores settlement 
additionally sets forth a preferential list of appropriate release options for children, with 
releasetoaparentorlegalguardianthefirstamongthem,followedbyreleasetoanadult
relative or licensed program. 
asinthehuttocase,counselfortheplaintiffsassertedthatholdingchildreninthefamily
detention centers violated the flores agreement due to the failure to apply the presumption 

6   r.i.l.r. v. johnson, 80 f.supp.3d 164 (d.d.c. 2015).
7   flores v. johnson, no. 85-4544 (july 24, 2015). 

142

journal on migration and human securityof release for children, the restrictive nature of the facilities, and the lack of state licensing 
as a child care facility for dilley and karnes. notably, similar to the children housed in 
the hutto facility, the children detained in the south texas facilities have exhibited wide-
ranging  negative  impacts  including  anxiety,  weight  loss,  chronic  illness,  breakdown  of 
familystructure,andotherharmsfromevenshortperiodsofdetention(cara2015b;
cara 2015c). 
on july 24, 2015, district court judge dolly gee ruled that the family detention facilities 
violated  the  terms  of  the  flores  settlement  by  failing  to  promptly  release  children  and 
holding them in restrictive and unlicensed facilities.8 her ruling ordered the government 
to take a number of steps to comply with the flores agreement, including prompt release 
ofchildrenalongwiththeirdetainedparent,inlightoftheagreementsfirstpreferencefor
release of a parent. the order also barred the government from holding children in secure 
facilities  where  their  movements  are  restricted,  as  well  as  in  unlicensed  facilities. the 
government appealed judge gees decision to the ninth circuit, where the case remains 
pending. 
in the meantime, dhs took belated steps to seek child care licenses for its facilities, but 
unsurprisingly ran into difficulties in getting prison-like immigration detention centers
licensed for the appropriate care of children. as with the hutto facility, dhs failed to seek 
an appropriate license for provision of child care for either the karnes or dilley facility 
when they opened in 2014, and ran both facilities without a license for a year and a half. 
the texas department of family and protective services (dfps) eventually granted a 
license to karnes via an ad hoc, emergency process in may 2016 (preston 2016a). dhs 
pursued a license for dilley as well, but in may 2016, a texas state court issued a temporary 
injunction preventing dfps from issuing a license to the facility.9 the suit for an injunction, 
brought by grassroots leadership and others, alleged that the texas dfps lacked statutory 
authorityundertexaslawtograntlicensestothefor-profitdetentionfacilitiesunderan
emergency process. in pennsylvania, the berks family detention center  the lone facility 
among the three that operated with an appropriate license in 2014 and 2015  lost its 
licenseinearly2016afteraconcertedadvocacyeffortfornon-renewal.dhsappealedthe
non-renewal to the state of pennsylvania and continues to operate the facility, without a 
license, while that appeal remains pending (constable 2016). 
beginning  in  the  summer  of  2014,  the  obama  administration  insisted  on  not  only 
entrenchment,  but  also  expansion  of  family  detention  despite  sustained  criticism  and 
multiple  legal  challenges.  this  scaling-up    accomplished  through  contracts  with 
privateprisoncompaniesreflectsaconcertedefforttonormalizefamilydetentionasa
permissiblefor-profitenterprise.but,asdescribedabove,thecontinuingoperationofthese
centers faces numerous legal obstacles, as well as organized and vocal opposition by faith 
leaders,medicalprofessionals,humanrightsgroups,andscholars(e.g.,aba2015;lirs
andwrc2014;takei2015).theobamaadministrationfailedtopersuadeevenmembers
ofitsownpoliticalpartyastothelegalityandwisdomofthispractice;over200members
ofcongresshaveurgedthepresidenttoendfamilydetention(ussenate2015;ushouse
2015). 

8   id.
9   grassroots leadership v. texas d.f.p.s., no. 15-004336 (may 4, 2016).

143

seeking a rational approach to a regional refugee crisisindeed,  dhss  own  advisory  committee  on  family  residential  centers10  recently 
released a comprehensive report calling for an immediate end to the widespread use of 
family detention (acfrc 2016). the committee, established on july 24, 2015 by dhs, 
is  comprised  of  independent  experts  in  education,  detention  reform  and  management, 
immigration and asylum law, social service provision, and physical and mental health. chief 
among its recommendations was for dhs to limit the use of detention against families in 
almostallcircumstances,withrareexceptionsonlyforcaseswhereindividualizedflight
risk or danger cannot be mitigated by any conditions of release. 
in  one  encouraging  development,  however,  secretary  johnson  recently  announced  that 
dhs would review its use of private immigration detention centers, including those used 
for families (dhs 2016). his announcement followed the department of justices decision 
tophaseoutfederalprivateprisonsduetotheirlesserefficacyanddiminishedstandards
(doj 2016). the secretarys announcement provides a welcome opportunity for dhs to 
rethink its use of family detention, particularly in light of the recommendations of its own 
advisory committee. 

2. expedited removal, reinstatement of removal, and accelerated 

proceedings
concurrent and intertwined with the use of family detention, expedited removal of families 
has also increased dramatically since 2014. most of the families who end up in the dilley, 
karnes,  and  berks  detention  facilities  do  so  while  undergoing  expedited  removal,  a 
fast-track  proceeding  established  under  the  illegal  immigration  reform  and  immigrant 
responsibility act of 1996 (iirira). both adults and families may be subject to expedited 
removal at dhss discretion if apprehended at a port of entry or within 100 miles of a us 
border within 14 days of entry.11 
prior to 2014, however, asylum seeker families were generally not subject to this curtailed 
process.  rather,  families  were  typically  placed  into  removal  proceedings  before  an 
immigration judge, in front of whom they could seek asylum (aba 2015, 27). in these 
normalremovalproceedings,individualshavetheopportunitytoobtaintheassistanceof
counsel, present evidence in support of their claims, and cross-examine witnesses against 
them, as well as to appeal negative decisions to the board of immigration appeals (bia) 
and seek review in the federal courts of appeals.12 
in contrast, expedited removal is a bare-bones, administrative process that permits few 
procedural protections, even to individuals raising asylum claims.13 under this extremely 
curtailed process, dhs removes people as quickly as possible, without providing them the 
benefitofahearingonthemeritsoftheirclaimsbeforeanimmigrationjudge.thosewho
10   author musalo is a member of said committee. 
118u.s.c.1225(b)(1)(a);8cfr1003.19(h)(2)(i).unaccompaniedchildrenarrivingalone,however,
are not placed into expedited removal. instead, special screening procedures apply for children from mexico 
andcanada;childrenfromallothercountriesaretransferredtothecustodyofthedepartmentofhealthand
humanservices(hhs)officeofrefugeeresettlement(orr)within72hoursofapprehension(8u.s.c.a.
 1232(a)). 
12   8 u.s.c.  1229a(b), 1252(a)(1).
13   8 u.s.c.  1225(b).

144

journal on migration and human securitydo not express a fear of return or an intention to apply for asylum immediately upon arrival 
are summarily returned to their home countries upon the simple issuance of an order by a 
dhsenforcementofficer.
individuals who do express a fear of persecution or intention to apply for asylum should be 
referredtoanasylumofficerforacurtailedscreeningknownasacrediblefearinterview
(cfi).thecfiassesseswhetherindividualshaveasignificantpossibilityofestablishing
asylumeligibility;iftheypassthecfiscreening,theycanthenapplyforasyluminthe
immigration courts.14 in practice, however, both the initial referral process and cfi itself 
areriddledwitherrorsandofferminimalprotections,particularlyfordetainedindividuals.
human rights groups and scholars have documented numerous cases in which individuals 
who should have been referred for a cfi were in fact simply removed, often after failing to 
be apprised of their rights and sometimes even after expressing a fear of persecution (hrf 
2015;hrw2014;pistoneandhoeffner2006;uscirf2005).forexample,humanrights
first documented a case in which dhs deported an indigenous-language-speaking family 
whohadfledgangpersecutionwithouteverreceivingacfi.thefatherhadtolddhs
officialsabouthisfearofreturntothecountry,buttheofficersdidnotspeakhislanguage
and did not bother to secure an interpreter. instead, dhs simply deported the entire family 
without inquiring into whether or not they were afraid to return (hrf 2015, 11-12). 
even when individuals do obtain a cfi, the interview fails to provide the due process 
protectionsofafullhearing,andsuffersfromerroneousdeterminationsasaresult.access
tocounselduringacfiisrestricted;regulationsprovidethatattorneysmay be present 
at the interview and may be permitted, in the discretion of the asylum officer, to present a 
statementattheendoftheinterview(emphasisadded).15 as a result of this broad discretion, 
asylumofficersoftenlimitattorneyparticipationtoaminimum,refusinginsomeinstances
to even let the attorney correct interpretation errors or present argument at all. during the 
cfi,  individuals  do  not  have  a  right  to  review  adverse  evidence,  present  full  evidence 
insupportoftheirclaims,orbetold,exceptincursoryfashion,thebasisofanofficers
decision. many of those in family detention, particularly in the karnes facility, undergo 
credible fear interviews over the phone, and thus never have an opportunity to establish 
rapport,buildtrust,andconveycredibilitytoanasylumofficerface-to-face(iachr2015,
69).moreover,asylumofficershaveconductedcfisofmothersindetentioninthepresence
of their children, impeding the ability of mothers to testify fully and to reveal traumatizing 
details such as death threats and sexual assault because they do not want to talk about such 
events in front of their children (lirs and wrc 2014). inadequate interpretation remains 
an issue for cfi interviews as well (aba 2015, 44). in the immediate aftermath of the 
surge, cfi passage rates dropped nation-wide from around 80 percent in early 2014 to only 
62 percent for june-september 2014 (uscis 2014). in the artesia, new mexico family 
detention facility, cfi passage rates at one point dipped as low as 38 percent.16 although 
14   8 u.s.c.  1225(b)(1)(b)(ii), (v).
15   8 c.f.r.  208.30(d)(4).
16    m.s.p.c.  v.  johnson,  no.  14-01437  (aug.  22,  2014). the  m.s.p.c.  litigation,  discussed  in  section  i, 
specifically challenged many of the deficiencies in the cfi process at artesia, arguing inter  alia,  that 
expedited removal procedures in the facility violated due process. as mentioned, dhs closed the much-
criticized artesia facility in december 2015, and the ongoing litigation was voluntarily dismissed (m.s.p.c. 
v. johnson, no. 14-01437 (aug. 22, 2014)). however, aclu continues to litigate challenges to expedited 
removal  proceedings  at  the  berks  facility,  representing  habeas  petitioners  who  received  a  negative  cfi 

145

seeking a rational approach to a regional refugee crisisthe cfi passage rates at present are higher both nationally and in the dilley, karnes, and 
berks facilities  at or above 80 percent nationwide and in each of the three facilities  
thenatureofcfisremainscurtailed(uscis2016a;uscis2016b).thisraisesconcerns
that the smaller fraction of individuals who do not pass their cfis may nonetheless present 
legitimate asylum claims. 
moreover, review for all negative cfi determinations is extremely limited. individuals can 
seekreviewoftheasylumofficerscfidecisionbeforeanimmigrationjudge,butthis,
too,differsvastlyfromthefullevidentiaryhearingajudgewouldnormallyconductin
immigration proceedings. negative cfi reviews often take place via video conference or 
eventelephone,andifthejudgeaffirmsthedecisionoftheasylumofficer,theindividual
has no right to appeal to bia or to petition for review by the federal circuit courts. nor 
can the individual cross-examine adverse witness or present full evidence. as in the cfi, 
the government limits the ability of attorneys to participate; a 1997 immigration court
memorandumstatesthatthereisnorighttorepresentationpriortoorduringthereview,
and immigration judges have curtailed attorneys roles as a result (eoir 1997, 10). 
for families in which a parent has a prior removal order, the process poses even greater 
hurdlesandfewerprotections.throughamechanismtermedreinstatementofremoval,
also created by iirira,17 dhs can simply reinstate the prior removal order with virtually 
no process at all.18 if an individual with a reinstated order expresses a fear of persecution 
ortorture,thegovernmentrefersthemforareasonablefearinterview(rfi),ascreening
interview in which applicants have to meet a higher standard than in a cfi. individuals 
whoestablishreasonablefearareplacedintowithholding-onlyproceedingsinwhich
they may seek only withholding of removal or convention against torture (cat) relief 
 and not asylum. although withholding of removal and cat prohibit return to torture or 
persecution,theyprovidefarfewerprotectionsandbenefitsthanasylum.unlikeasylees,
these individuals cannot bring their spouse and children abroad to live in the united states, 
donotqualifyformostfederalbenefits,havenopathtocitizenship,andcanhaveprotective
status stripped away more easily. in addition, the rfi process itself is riddled with the same 
due process errors that plague cfis, such as inadequate interpretation and few procedural 
protections(lirsandwrc2014;aba2015).
in addition to formal expedited removal and reinstatement of removal under the immigration 
and nationality act, the obama administration also accelerated the proceedings of children 
andfamiliesseekingasyluminotherways,inparticularbyfast-trackingtheircasesinthe
immigrationcourtsandbeforetheasylumoffice.injuly2014,theadministrationannounced
thatimmigrationcourtdocketswouldprioritizethecasesofrecentbordercrossers(doj
2014).theseprioritydocketsreferredtocolloquiallyasrocketdocketshearcases
of unaccompanied children as well as families who recently crossed the border, including 
manyreleasedfromfamilydetention.theexecutiveofficeforimmigrationreview(eoir)
reassigned immigration judges in courts throughout the country to these new expedited 
dockets, shifting them from their regular dockets. 

decision.thehabeaspetitionsfiledonbehalfofmothersandchildrenatberksallegethatexpeditedremoval
processes in family detention violate due process and statutory rights (aclu 2016). 
17   iirira  241(a)(5).
18   8 u.s.c.  1231(a)(5).

146

journal on migration and human securitythe creation of these new priority dockets for children and families had a negative impact 
onthesevulnerablepopulations,particularlyontheirabilitytofindandsecurecounselto
representthemincourt.atfirst,immigrationjudgespursuanttotheannouncedfast-track
policy routinely granted only short continuances for respondents, departing from the prior 
practice of allowing longer continuances for pro se individuals to secure counsel (srikantiah 
et al. 2014). indeed, even the national association of immigration judges (naij) criticized 
the administrations decision to mandate that childrens cases leap ahead of other cases in 
thealready-backloggedcourtsystem(solis2014).asthenaijnoted,wedealwithcases
thatareoften,ineffect,deathpenaltycases.immigrationlawenforcementmuststandon
itsownandnotbeallowedtoovershadowortocontroltheimmigrationjudicialprocess
(ibid.). within dhs, us citizenship and immigration services (uscis) also adjusted its 
scheduling to rush through child asylum cases over adult asylum cases, even for children 
without counsel (langlois 2015). 
theseactionsposeseriousdueprocessconcerns.amongthemostperniciousoftheeffects
of expedited, curtailed, and accelerated procedures are barriers to counsel. the limited 
role  and  availability of  counsel  in  cfi  and  rfi  proceedings  have  led  to  serious  errors 
in those decisions, as described above. in addition, numerous studies have underscored 
the  importance  of  counsel  in  obtaining  relief  for  children  and  survivors  of  trauma  in 
formal immigration proceedings. children with attorneys are five times more likely to
obtain asylum or other humanitarian protection (trac 2015a). adults with children with 
attorneys are fourteen times more likely to secure protection in these same proceedings 
(trac 2015b). at the same time, misinformation, lack of resources, and a lack of low-cost 
andfreelegalservicesimpedetheabilityofmanytofindattorneys.
notably, the advisory committee on family residential centers recommended in its 2016 
report that dhs cease placing asylum seeker families into expedited removal in light of 
many of the aforementioned concerns (acfrc 2016). instead, the advisory committee 
recommended that dhs return to its prior practice of simply issuing a notice to appear for 
regular immigration court proceedings and that it promptly release families. 

3. raids 

in late december 2015, media reports began to circulate surrounding upcoming raids of 
central american families and children planned by dhs (markon and nakamura 2015). 
dhsconductedhomeraidsoverthenewyearsweekendaroundthecountryandconfirmed,
on january 4, 2016, that it had apprehended 121 individuals, including 71 children and 50 
adults,mostlymothers(johnson2016b;nilc2016).initsofficialstatementontheraids,
dhs was explicit in its desire to use aggressive enforcement tactics as a way to send a 
messagetoothers.secretaryjohnsonsopeningwordsstated,asihavesaidrepeatedly,
our borders arenotopentoillegalmigration;ifyou comehereillegally, we willsend
youbackconsistentwithourlawsandvalues(johnson2016b).thisstatementfailsto
recognize the right of asylum seekers to seek protection from persecution under us and 
internationallaw.commentingontheraidslaterthatspring,aseniordhsofficialreiterated,
wecannotsendamessagethatoncefamilieswithkidscrosstheborder,theyarehereto
stay.ifmanyendupstayinghereindefinitely,theconcernisthatitwillencouragefurther
illegalimmigration(constable2016).

147

seeking a rational approach to a regional refugee crisisthe invasive raids took place in the early morning hours, before dawn, with ice agents 
stormingthehomesofmotherswithchildrenandwakingupterrifiedfamiliesinthedark
(graybill and cho 2016). according to a report on the raids in the atlanta, georgia region, 
dhs by and large failed to secure warrants to enter homes, in violation of longstanding 
constitutional principles, and also impeded the families access to counsel after picking 
them up (ibid.). ice also used false information in some cases to gain access to homes 
(ibid.;nilc2016).
dhs transferred families subject to the raids to the dilley family detention facility for 
deportation processing. although the government portrayed the families subject to raids as 
ineligible for asylum, interviews by attorneys revealed that many of the families did in fact 
have valid claims, but were often simply unable to present those claims due to an inability 
to secure counsel or to understand the immigration court proceedings (foley 2016). indeed, 
fewer than half of the individuals subject to the january raids, including young children, 
had secured attorneys in their asylum cases (preston 2016b). pro bono attorneys with the 
cara project at dilley attempted to meet with all families picked up during raids, but 
facilityofficialsblockedaccesstomostfamilies.intheend,volunteerattorneysmanaged
to represent 12 families and successfully secured stays of removal by the bia for all 12, 
or over 33 individuals (aic 2016). the fact that the bia granted these stays speaks to 
the meritorious nature of the immigrants underlying claims for protection  as courts 
considering a stay of removal must generally consider the likelihood of success on the 
merits of the underlying claim.19 
the  aggressive  home  raids  traumatized  mothers  with  their  young  children,  caused 
widespread panic in immigrant communities, and drew a swift backlash of heavy criticism 
(preston  2016b).  more  than  100  members  of  the  house  and  senate  wrote  president 
obamatodemandacessationofraids(ibid.).theletter,however,hadlittleeffect.three
months later, on march 9, 2016, dhs secretary jeh johnson revealed that ice had been 
conducting home raids pursuant to operation guardian border since january 2016.
johnson announced that this operation had led to raids resulting in the apprehension of 
336 individuals, the majority of whom entered as unaccompanied children after january 1, 
2014 but had since turned 18 years old (johnson 2016a). although ice claimed it would 
not target churches, medical offices, or schools, 10th grader kimberly pineda chavez
was picked up on her way to school in atlanta, georgia, as were teenagers yefri sorto-
hernandezandwildindavidguillenacostainnorthcarolina(holpuch2016;lee2016).
on may 12, 2016, reuters reported yet another spate of raids planned for summer 2016 
against hundreds of families and unaccompanied children (edwards 2016). within just two 
weeks, pro bono attorneys at the dilley and karnes facilities encountered 16 such families 
(cara 2016). one mother and her 14-year-old daughter were deported during the night, 
evenaftertheirprobonoattorneysinformeddhsofficialsoftheirintenttoseekastayof
removal (ibid.). 
the raids have sown terror in immigrant communities across the country. teachers in the 
schools attended by yefri and wildin reported that numerous stellar immigrant students 
had begun missing school or even dropped out entirely over fear of being deported (lee 

19   nken v. holder, 556 us 418 (2009).

148

journal on migration and human security2016). in one maryland high school with a high percentage of latino and central american 
students, attendance dropped by half following the january raids (united we dream 2016a). 
in response, the durham school system passed a resolution calling on the administration to 
end the raids (durham school board 2016), as did the national education association and 
the american federation of teachers (aft et al. 2016). in addition to children dropping 
out of school, health care providers reported a stark decline in immigrant patient care in 
affectedcommunities(nilc2016;hiemstra2016).

4. interdiction, or constructive refoulement

the  us  governments  harsh,  deterrent  tactics  against  central americans  also  extended 
beyond its borders to mexico and central america, where it encouraged and funded strong 
enforcement measures to keep asylum seekers from reaching the us border. following 
the 2014 surge, the united states worked with mexico to increase efforts to interdict
migrants along mexicos southern border, and funded additional programs in honduras 
and guatemala to prevent would-be migrants from journeying north. 
since2007,theunitedstateshasprovidedassistancetomexicoviathemridainitiative
aidpackagestofortifymexicossouthernborder.thisaidintensifiedafter2011(isacsonet
al.2015,5).followingthe2014surge,usofficialsandcongresspersonscalledonmexico
to do more to detain and deter migrants from central america (ibid., 5). at a senate hearing 
in july 2014, ambassador thomas shannon stated that a key component of us strategy 
tostemtheflowofunaccompaniedchildrenfromcentralamericawouldbetoshoreup
theabilityofmexicoandguatemalatointerdictmigrantsbeforetheycrossintomexico
(shannon 2014). according to shannon, the united states pledged to spend $86 million 
in existing funds within the state departments international narcotics control and law 
enforcementunit(ibid.).thedepartmentofdefenseprovidedsignificantfundingaswell,
reporting$44.6milliondollarsgiventomexicanmilitaryandpoliceofficialsforcounter-
drugefforts(dod2014).
with this infusion of cash, the mexican government intensified its own border control
efforts.onjuly7,2014,mexicanpresidentenriquepeanietoandguatemalanpresident
ottoprezmolinaannouncedajointsouthernborderprogram(programa frontera sur 
(pfs)). pursuant to this operation, the national migration institute (instituto nacional de 
migracin (inm)), mexicos immigration enforcement agency, increased the number of 
agents on the mexico-guatemala border by 300 (isacson et al. 2015, 6). mexican federal 
police at the border increased as well (ibid., 10).
intheyearfollowingthe2014surge,mexicosdeportationsofcentralamericanmigrants
almost doubled, from 49,893 to 92,889 (wola 2015). the number of unaccompanied 
children apprehended by mexico jumped from 9,594 in fy 2014 to 16,038 in fy 2015 
(isacson et al. 2015, 8). these increases in apprehensions at the southern mexico border 
correspond  exactly  with  the  decrease  in  apprehension  of  children  and  families  at  the 
southern  us  border.  the  correlation  strongly  suggests  that  heightened  enforcement  in 
mexico, and not diminishment of root causes of migration or us policies at or beyond the 
us border to deter arrival, led to the decrease in the number of children apprehended by 
usofficials.

149

seeking a rational approach to a regional refugee crisismexicos asylum system, however, remained woefully inadequate to address the legitimate 
protectionneedsofcentralamericansfleeingpersecution.in2014,mexicodetainedover
107,000 migrants from central america but recognized only 451 individuals as refugees 
(wola2015).moreover,mexicosaggressiveenforcementefforts,attheurgingofthe
united states, have resulted in serious harm and human rights violations against migrants. 
groups documented numerous instances of central americans suffering physical and
sexual abuse by mexican authorities, as well as due process failures and refoulement of 
refugees (isacson et al. 2015, 25-27). in mexicos detention centers, deplorable conditions 
include  inadequate  provision  of  food  and  medical  care,  as  well  as  physical  and  sexual 
violencebyprisonofficialsagainstdetainees(ibid.,27).finally,intensifiedenforcement
effortshavepushedmigrationroutesthroughmexicounderground,makingthemdeadlier
asaresult.inparticular,asbothprivateandpublicsecurityofficialsbegancrackingdown
on migrants riding on the top of trains, desperate migrants have resorted to harsher, more 
remote, and dangerous routes. along these routes, criminal groups have subjected them 
to robbery, sexual assault, disappearances, kidnapping, torture, and murder  at times 
working in tandem or with the acquiescence of mexican authorities (isacson et al. 2015, 
28-29;podkulandkysel2015,11-12).
law enforcement efforts in central american countries also intensified due to us
intervention and funding. in june 2014, honduran law enforcement units, funded by the 
us state department bureau of international narcotics and law enforcement, began a 
new operation to prevent children and families from crossing the honduras and guatemala 
border (podkul and kysel 2015, 9). these units received equipment and training from us 
law enforcement, including ice and us border patrol (carcamo 2014). in guatemala, the 
united states provided $17 million in funding to guatemalan army, police, and prosecutorial 
officialsforthecreationoftwoborderinitiatives,forboththeguatemala-mexicoborder
and the guatemala-honduras border. 
in addition, while the united states government has implemented some in-country refugee 
processing options for refugees from central america, these efforts remain woefully
inadequate and do not excuse interdiction south of the us-mexico border. the central 
american  minors  (cam)  program,  for  example,  provides  refugee  processing  for  child 
refugees in el salvador, honduras, and guatemala, but is limited in scope. as initially 
implemented, only children with parents who have lawful status in the united states were 
eligible to apply, and, as of april of 2016, the cam program had admitted only 197 children 
(hennessy-fisk 2016). in july 2016, the administration announced an expansion of the cam 
program to permit older siblings, biological parents, and caregivers of a qualifying child to 
accompany the child to the united states (davis 2016). it also increased in-country refugee 
screening in each of the northern triangle countries, as well as a process  in collaboration 
with the government of costa rica, the un high commissioner for refugees (unchr), 
and the international organization for migration (iom)  for transferring pre-screened 
refugees in danger in their home countries to costa rica to await resettlement in the united 
states(ibid.).althoughthesereflectsignificantimprovements,thecamprogramremains
limited to serving only the children and family members (or child caregivers) of parents 
with legal status in the united states. as a result, it addresses only a fraction of the need 
for refugee protection in the region. in contrast, us interdiction policies have negatively 
affectedtensorevenhundredsofthousandsofasylumseekersfromcentralamerica.

150

journal on migration and human security***

taken together, the administrations actions amount to a multi-pronged, sustained attack 
on  the  ability  of  central american  refugees  to  secure  protection.  its  deterrence-based 
approach has led to aggressive measures not only at its own border but also extending 
south, to mexico and central america. these measures place refugees in harms way in 
transit, upon arrival, and in too many cases, result in their illegal refoulement. as discussed 
in section iii below, restrictive interpretations of refugee law seriously limit protection to 
bonafideasylumseekersaswell,continuingpasttrends.
deterrence tactics violate the united states international obligations under the 1967 refugee 
protocol, incorporating the 1951 refugee convention, in multiple ways. limiting access 
to its territory via interdiction  essentially externalizing the us southern border (podkul 
and kysel 2015)  results directly in the return of refugees to situations of persecution. 
however, aggressive tactics at and within its own borders lead to illegal refoulement as 
well. faulty screening processes, detention of traumatized mothers and children, and raids 
capturing individuals who never had a chance to seek asylum before a judge all result 
directly or indirectly in erroneous outcomes, and interfere with the fundamental right of 
refugees to seek asylum under domestic and international law. at the same time, the due 
process failures of these same policies pose serious constitutional concerns.
the refusal to recognize central americans fleeing violence as a legitimate refugee
population  entirely  ignores  the  reality  of  conditions  in  guatemala,  honduras,  and  el 
salvador  and is especially pernicious given the united states role in creating the crisis 
south of its border. in section ii below, we describe the root causes of migration, including 
the us governments historical actions. 

ii. the real reasons for migration: push factors in the 
northern triangle
the migration surge from the northern triangle countries is explained by the dire conditions 
thatprevailinelsalvador,guatemalaandhonduras.violenceplaguestheregion;the
northern triangle countries have homicide rates that are among the highest in the world. 
violence against women and girls, as well as gender-motivated killings  referred to as 
femicide/feminicides  also top global records. 
gangs and organized crime have proliferated, contributing to the skyrocketing levels of 
violence. household violence, which disproportionately impacts women and children, is 
at  epidemic  proportions. adding  to  this  are  conditions  of  extreme  poverty  and  income 
inequality leading to social exclusion, and depriving large segments of the population of 
those minimal conditions necessary to survive. 
two  recent  unhcr  studies  concur  that  country  conditions  in  the  northern  triangle 
countries, rather than pull factors in the united states, have fueled the migration surge. its 
2014 study, children on the run: unaccompanied children leaving central america and 
mexico and the need for international protection, found that 58 percent of child migrants 
leftsituationswhichpresentedinternationalprotectionconcernsfleeingviolence,abuse,

151

seeking a rational approach to a regional refugee crisisand social exclusion (unhcr 2014, 25), while its 2015 study, women on the run: first-
hand  accounts  of  refugees  fleeing  el  salvador,  guatemala,  honduras,  and  mexico 
similarly found that the women fleeing those countries present[ed] a clear need for
internationalprotection(unhcr2015b,2).
assertions that the migration surge is the result of pull rather than push factors ignore the data 
to the contrary, including statistics documenting that other countries in the region (mexico, 
belize, costa rica, nicaragua, and panama) have experienced a 13-fold increase in asylum 
claimsfromthosefleeingnortherntrianglecountries(unhcr2015b).althoughsome
individualswillhavemixedreasonsformigration,thesenumbersreflecttheprimacyand
prevalence of protection-based needs (unhcr 2014).
the recognition that a majority of migrants from el salvador, guatemala, and honduras 
have international protection concerns, and may qualify as refugees, has implications for 
uspolicy.punitiveresponsesintendedtodetertheentryofbonafideasylumseekers
from any region of the world  are inconsistent with obligations pursuant to international 
norms as well as domestic law and are not consonant with us values and national identity. 
however, in the case of the northern triangle countries, the united states has a moral 
obligation that flows not just from international and domestic norms, but arises from
its tortured history with each one of the countries. in pursuing its own interests in the 
region, the united states engaged in policies and undertook actions that indisputably have 
contributed to the disastrous conditions that currently exist. an acknowledgement of this 
responsibility would be welcome as an exercise in truth and reconciliation, but beyond that, 
it would add to the moral heft of arguments that the united states can and should do better 
initsresponsetothosesufferingtheviolence,inequality,andsocialexclusionthatprevail
in el salvador, guatemala, and honduras. 

1. the history of us involvement in the region

the  united  states  took  actions  and  pursued  policies  in  each  of  the  northern  triangle 
countries  that  strengthened  authoritarian,  anti-democratic  elements,  and  contributed  to 
the legacy of violence, poverty, and social exclusion that are root causes of the current 
migrationsurge.theunitedstatesviewedtheregionthroughacoldwarlensandjustified
itsactionsasfightingbackthecommunistthreatinitsbackyard.towardsthatend,it
supported murderous regimes in guatemala and el salvador, while it worked to force the 
leftistsandinistasfrompowerinnicaragua.itdrewhondurasintotheseregionalconflicts
and secured its compliant support by lavishing cash assistance on its repressive military. 
all of these actions have had negative consequences that continue to reverberate in the 
region. it is beyond the scope of this article to provide an extensively detailed description 
of us interventions, but the summaries below provide a distillation of undisputed facts 
regarding us involvement and their consequences.

guatemala

guatemalahaslonghadoneofthemostunequaldistributionsofresourcesandcapital
intheworld(insightcrimeguatemalan.d.).itsindigenousmayanpopulationhasbeen

152

journal on migration and human securitymarginalized socially and politically since the spanish conquest, and guatemalas
treatment  of  its  indigenous  population  has  been  compared  to  south africas  apartheid 
(ibid.).historically,effortsatreformhavebeenmetwithunbridledrepression.
us government involvement in guatemala can be traced to 1954 when it orchestrated the 
overthrow of the democratically-elected guatemalan president, jacobo arbenz guzman 
(gibney 1997). arbenz had drawn the wrath of the us government for implementing a 
policyofagrarianreforminwhichtheguatemalangovernmentexpropriate[d]unused
landfromlargelandholdersinexchangeforgovernmentbonds(ibid.,83-84).theunited
fruit company, a us company, which had been operating in guatemala since 1870 and 
reapinghugebenefits,20 was not pleased with the new land reform law. the united states 
subsequentlycutoffaidtoguatemalaandthenfundedandtrainedamercenaryforceto
depose arbenz (ibid., 82-85). 
the overthrow of arbenz started a cycle of government-sponsored violence and
repressionagainstguatemalancitizensinwhichtheunitedstateswascomplicit(rohter
1996).guatemalawasthefirstcountryinlatinamericatoexperiencedeathsquadsand
disappearances,andusmilitaryadviserswereinvolvedintheformationofthedeath
squads,andtheheadoftheusmilitarymissionpubliclyjustifiedtheiroperation(jonas
1996, 147). 
the coup that unseated arbenz, and the government repression that followed, were the 
precursors to the decades-long guatemalan civil war. guerrilla forces from the guatemalan 
national revolutionary union (unidad revolucionara nacional guatemalteca (urng)) 
fought with the objective of transforming the economic, social, and political systems which 
had  left  the  mostly  indigenous  population  impoverished  and  virtually  disenfranchised. 
duringthatconflict,governmentsecurityforcescommittedmassivehumanrightsviolations,
including genocide against the indigenous population, who were perceived as supporting 
the urng (chamarbagwala and morn 2008). over 200,000 to 250,000 guatemalans  
many of them mayan  were killed or disappeared, and more than a million people were 
displaced (musalo et al. 2010, 181). state security forces used torture, sexual violence, and 
violence against women as a strategy of war (ibid., 181). 
beginning in 1966, the united states provided hundreds of millions of dollars in assistance 
to guatemala. when reported human rights violations became so egregious that the us 
government could not openly continue to support the guatemalan government, it continued 
its support clandestinely from 1977 to 1983 (gibney 1997, 80). 
whentheconflictended,theurngwasleftwithverylittlebargainingpower,because
the military had essentially won the war. there were no meaningful economic or social 
transformations, amnesty for war crimes was enacted, and the perpetrators of gross human 
rights violations during the conflict remained in the communities and held powerful
positionsinthegovernment(cruz2011,15).thefailuretopurgesuchviolentactors
during this transition is a contributing factor to the high levels of crime and corruption that 
exist today. 

20unitedfruithadunlimiteduseofmuchofthecountrysbestland,completeaccesstoguatemalas
resources,exemptionfromnearlyalltaxesandduties,andunlimitedprofitremittances(gibney1997,82).

153

seeking a rational approach to a regional refugee crisisthe us role in undermining democracy by its orchestration of the coup against arbenz and 
its support for the guatemalan military are sobering realities. we do not purport to draw a 
straight line of causation between these interventions and current conditions of violence, 
inequality, and social exclusion that prevail in guatemala. however, there is no doubt that 
usactionscauseduntoldsufferingandsetbackstothestruggleforjusticeanddemocracy;
one can only speculate what guatemala would be like today if the us government had not 
forcedarbenzoutofofficeorsupportedtherepressiveguatemalanmilitaryduringthe
countrys civil war. 
writingin1997,wellbeforethecurrentmigrantsurge,gibneyaskedwhethertheunited
states  government  bears  some  responsibility  for  guatemalas  decades  of  horror,  and 
whether american involvement . . . should prompt special measures to help the guatemalan 
people achieve some measure of peace, security, and justice(gibney 1997, 79). his
questions remain valid today, with a slight rewording: to what degree does the united 
stateshaveamoralobligationtoprovideprotectiontothosewhofleethecontemporary
violence, inequality and deprivation in guatemala  conditions which the us government 
helped create through its misguided and self-interested intervention?

el salvador

el salvador went through a brutal 12-year civil war that ended with the signing of peace 
accords in january 1992. the civil war was fought to throw off decades of economic
inequalityandexploitationsufferedbythemajorityofthepopulationatthehandsofanelite
oligarchywhosewillwasenforcedbystatesecurityforces.duringtheconflictbetween
the  farabundo  marti  national  liberation  front  (fmln)  and  the  government,  at  least 
75,000 people were killed, 7,000 were disappeared, and 500,000 were displaced (bejarano 
2002,128;castellano2015,70-71).themajorityoftheseabuseswerecommittedbythe
salvadoran state.
the united states   beginning with the carter administration, but then continuing at a 
higher level under the reagan administration  funded the military, despite incontrovertible 
evidence that it committed wide-scale human rights violations and war crimes. among the 
many  atrocities  committed  by  military  or  paramilitary  forces  were  the  assassination  of 
archbishop oscar romero, the kidnapping, rape, and murder of four us churchwomen, 
andthekillingofsevenjesuits,theirhousekeeper,andherdaughteratthejossimen
caascentralamericanuniversity(universidad centroamericana simeon caas). 
violence during the war was extremely high; by late 1980, it was reported that 200
individuals were killed a week, and in early 1981 that number had jumped to 300 to 500 
weekly. notwithstanding its egregious human rights record, the us government continued 
to provide military assistance to the salvadoran government, which by the end of the war 
hadreceivedmorethanfivebillionusdollars.theunitedstatesfinallyendeditssupport
in 1989 following a change in us policy and a campaign led by senator joseph moakley 
protesting human rights abuses in el salvador (howard 2007, 93-94). 
the salvadoran civil war ended in a stalemate between the fmln and the military, with 
a negotiated peace accord. for the most part, the accords failed to address the economic 

154

journal on migration and human securityinequalitiesthathadledtotheconflict.instead,pressurewasintheoppositedirection:elite
salvadoran interests, supported by the united states, successfully pushed for the adoption 
of neoliberal economic policies that led to greater poverty and marginalization among the 
salvadoranpopulation.thesepoliciesincludedeliminatingpricecontrols,deregulating
interest rates, and cutting public spending, especially in public services such as education 
andhealthcare(moodie2011,42).thesocialexclusionresultingfromeconomicinequality
is a driver of migration, and, as discussed further below, is also a factor making youth more 
susceptible to recruitment into gangs and organized crime syndicates. 
although the accords did not address economic equality in a meaningful manner, they 
wereambitiousintermsofreformsanddemocratization(cruz2011,10-11).however,
they fell short in implementation on these issues. as had occurred in guatemala, a broad 
amnesty was enacted that prevented the prosecution of gross human rights violators. and 
as in guatemala, individuals associated with military or paramilitary groups were able to 
incorporate into new institutions created after the accords, compromising the integrity of 
these bodies. the corruption and complicity of state security forces in criminal violence 
todaycanbepartiallyexplainedbytheinfiltrationofhumanrightsviolatorsandcriminals
into these institutions. 
us intervention in el salvador, and its virtually unwavering support for a brutal military, 
brings with it a considerable measure of moral culpability. salvadoran society still bears 
thescarsinflictedbythedeathanddestructionoftheconflict,andsomehavecommented
that the brutality and loss of life during the civil war normalized violence in the society and 
contributes to contemporary levels of violence. 
us complicity in human rights violations is compounded by us pressure and advocacy 
for  economic  policies  that  denied  the  majority  of  salvadorans  an  opportunity  for  self-
determination and thwarted the creation of new social and economic arrangements. twenty 
years after the end of the conflict, the evidence indicates that poverty, inequality, and
resulting social exclusion continue to be the status quo. acknowledgement of the us role 
in el salvador, and its contribution to current conditions would be a constructive step in 
reconsidering us policies towards salvadoran migrants. 

honduras

when ronald reagan assumed the us presidency in the early 1980s, the leftist sandinistas 
in nicaragua had forced from power dictator anastasio somoza, and the leftist fmln was 
battling the salvadoran state to determine the destiny of the country. the incoming reagan 
administration, with an anti-communist fervor, was determined to see the fmln defeated 
andtorollbacktherevolutioninnicaragua(shepherd1984,112).
honduras,  with  its  strategic  location  at  the  northern  border  of  nicaragua,  became  the 
launchpadfortheusmilitaryinterventionintheregion(shepherd1984,113).based
inandoperatedfromhonduras,theunitedstatesrecruited,trained,andfundedcontra
forces to attempt to destabilize nicaragua (ibid., 114-15). the united states also drew 
hondurasintotheconflictinelsalvador;usmilitaryadvisorstrainedsalvadoranmilitary
troopsinhonduras.throughtheseandothermeasures,hondurasbecamecentraltous
counterrevolutionarystrategyincentralamerica(ibid.,115).

155

seeking a rational approach to a regional refugee crisisinexchangeforundertakingthisrole,usmilitaryaidtohondurasincreasedmorethan
tenfoldunderthereaganadministration(shepherd1984,116).sointentwastheunited
statesonfightingwhatitconsideredaburgeoningcommunistthreatthatitpaidaknown
internationaldrugtrafficker,juanramonmattaballesteros,tousehisairfleettogetaidand
weaponstothecontras(insightcrimehondurasn.d.).uspolicy,anditsstrengthening
of the honduran military, had an economically harmful and politically destabilizing impact 
on honduras. [d]emocratic institutions and practices [were] undermined (shepherd
1984,135),andtherewasanenormousincreaseinmilitaryinfluence(cruz2011,11).
thisriseininfluencewasproblematicgiventhat,bythemid-1980s,themilitary[in
honduras]werenotonlyresponsibleforhumanrightsabuses;theywerealsoinvolvedin
thegrowingdrug-traffickingrings(ibid.,17-18).
subsequenteffortstoremovethesecriminalelementsfromsecurityinstitutionshadlimited
success, and similar to what occurred in guatemala and el salvador, the criminal elements 
remainedinstateinstitutionswheretheyhavehadacorruptinginfluenceandcontinueto
contribute to the violence and criminality honduras is experiencing today. honduras police 
force is considered one of the most corrupt in the region (insight crime honduras n.d.). 
reportshavedocumentedtheexistenceofdeathsquadswithinthepolice(cruz2011,
22)aswellasthemurderofhundredsofstreetchildrenandsuspectedgangmembersby
so-calledcleansinggroupsassociatedwiththepolice(ibid.,23).
honduras  experienced  a  coup  in  2009.  its  democratically  elected  president,  manual 
zelaya, was forced out of office and into exile (meyer 2013, 3-4). roberto micheletti
was named by the honduran congress to complete zelayas term (ibid., 2). although us 
policy in the aftermath of the coup that forcibly removed zelaya was initially appropriate 
with condemnation and a series of sanctions, it ultimately softened (ibid., 9-10). some 
commentatorshaveattributedthisshifttotheinfluenceoftheusrepublicanpartywhich
aggressively took up michelettis cause, with 17 republican senators sending a letter to 
thensecretaryofstatehilaryclintonurgingtheadministrationtooverhaulitsposition
onhonduras(legler2010,609-10). 21
the  human  rights  situation  in  honduras  worsened  after  the  coup.  the  inter-american 
commission on human rights found serious violations of human rights during
michelettis  rule  (meyer  2013,  4).  there  was  also  an  increase  in  violence  against 
journalistsandpoliticalandsocialactivists(ibid.,18)thatcontinuedintothetermof
presidentporfiriolobososain2013(ibid.,2).theexacerbatedinstabilityinthecountry
hadothernegativeconsequences;colombiandrugtraffickinggangschangedtheirroutes
to honduras . . . just days after the coup and turned it into the principal handover point for 
cocainetomexicancartels(insightcrimehondurasn.d.).
as  with  guatemala  and  el  salvador,  us  interventions  in  honduras  have  been  less 
frequently motivated by lofty ideals, than by shortsighted self-interest. the strengthening 
of a repressive and corrupt military in honduras, and the softening of opposition to the 
2009 coup have directly contributed to the current situation in honduras. us responsibility 
21 as described by legler, republican senators and congressmen undertook three separate trips to
tegucigalpatomeetwithmichelettiindefianceoftheobamagovernmentspositionofdiplomaticisolation.
theyalsoheldupsenatorialapprovaloftwokeyobamadiplomaticappointmentsintheamericas(legler
2010, 610).

156

journal on migration and human securityforitspastactionsshouldinformitsresponsetothosewhosuffertheconsequences.but
instead of recognizing that, and acting accordingly, the united states has instead contributed 
training and funding to honduras special forces to prevent the children who are victims 
of the current circumstances from migrating to safety (musalo et al. 2015, 125). although 
these operations to stop migration have been presented as child protection measures, they 
areinreality...migrationcontrolmeasures(ibid.,125).bymilitarizingthehonduran
border, they have made children more vulnerable, and have obscure[d] the structural
causes[behind]migrationofchildrenandadolescents(ibid.,125).

2. recent history and its implications for criminal violence 

the section above discusses the recent history of the northern triangle countries to expose 
the role of the united states in contributing to the conditions that exist in the region and 
to raise questions regarding the concomitant us moral responsibilities. an examination of 
therecenthistorywithafocusonpost-conflicttransitionsalsoshedslightonwhyel
salvador, guatemala, and honduras have been especially fertile ground for the explosion 
of criminal violence  while a country like nicaragua has not.
in two compelling articles, jose miguel cruz has pointed to a key distinction between the 
northerntrianglecountriesandnicaragua(cruz2011;cruz2015).thefourcountries
havealotofsimilarities;allfourcountriesexperiencedcivilconflictand/orrepressive
military regimes and currently experience high levels of poverty and inequality. despite 
these similarities, what distinguishes the northern triangle countries from nicaragua is their 
post-conflict/post-militaryregimetransitions.inelsalvador,guatemala,andhonduras,
thepost-conflicttransitionsdidnotremovecorruptandviolentstateactorsoreffectively
preventthemfromincorporatingintonewlyformeddemocraticinstitutions(cruz2011,
14-18). in stark contrast, in nicaragua, violent state actors were never incorporated into 
post-conflictstateinstitutions.therewasaneffectivepurgingofthoseelementsfromthe
dictatorial somoza regime. 
the flawed transitions of the northern triangle countries prevented the new security
institutions from fulfilling their intended role of strengthening the rule of law. the
incorporation of violent and/or criminal holdovers  violent entrepreneurs as cruz
calls them  undermined the institutions and contributed to the high levels of corruption 
and complicity with criminal enterprises which characterize the governments of all three 
northern triangle countries. the strong presence of these unsavory elements from prior 
regimeshashadasecondarybutequallyperniciouseffect:namelythatcitizensinthe
northern triangle countries lack trust in the police and related security forces. they do not 
report crime, which, among other factors, contributes to the perpetuation of impunity. 
nicaragua stands in stark contrast to el salvador, guatemala, and honduras.22 as a result 
of the sandinista revolution and its aftermath, the repressive elements of the prior somoza 
regime were more fully rooted out (cruz 2011, 19-21). although nicaragua is the second 

22   although the authors note that nicaragua has not faced the same level of violence country-wide, this does 
not mean that individuals from nicaragua do not raise protection needs. rather, individuals from nicaragua 
do continue to raise meritorious refugee and asylum claims when targeted on account of protected grounds 
inspecificsituations.

157

seeking a rational approach to a regional refugee crisispoorest country in the hemisphere (second only to haiti), it has not been plagued by high 
levelsofviolentcrime;itshomicideratehasbeenrelativelylowcomparedtothenorthern
triangle countries, and gangs and organized crime have not established themselves there. 
furthermore,innicaragua,whereeffortstoremoveviolentandcorruptelementsweremore
successful,citizenshavenotablygreaterconfidenceintheircountryslawenforcementand
aremorelikelytoreportcrime,bothofwhichcontributetosignificantlylowerratesof
criminal violence.23
contrasting the situation in nicaragua with those in el salvador, guatemala, and honduras, 
helps illustrate how decades of us policy helped produce the current conditions that force 
migrantstofleefromnortherntrianglecountries.
additionally,theunitedstatesundoubtedlybearssignificantresponsibilityforthedramatic
spike in violence in the region via its deportation policies from the 1990s onward (cruz 
2011, 6-7). notwithstanding the volatile and destabilized circumstances in each of the three 
northern triangle countries, the united states dramatically increased its deportations of 
gang members who had been raised in the united states  and became initiated into gangs 
whiletheretoguatemala,honduras,andelsalvador.thesedeportationsdirectlyfe[d]
into  the  burgeoning  gang  infrastructure  simultaneously  surfacing  in  northern  triangle 
countries,andledtotheexpansionanddeepentrenchmentofthetransnationalgangs
there (de waegh 2015). 

3. the push factors

numerous reports and articles detail the conditions in the northern triangle countries that 
drive migration. the following discussion is a brief overview of factors that are at the root 
cause of the migrant surge. often, these will be intertwined, as vulnerable segments of 
societydisproportionatelysufferfrommultipleformsofviolenceandothersocialills.

societal violence

societal violence, including high levels of homicides, is a primary cause of migration. in 
its2013publication,theunofficeofdrugsandcrimereportedhondurasashavingthe
highest homicide rate globally (90.4 killings per 100,000), el salvador the fourth highest 
(41.2per100,000),andguatemalathefifth(39.9per100,000)(unodc2013,24).the
numbershaveshiftedsincethen,withelsalvadorgainingtheunenviablefirstplaceslot
for highest homicide rate globally (watts 2015). unhcr found that 48 percent of children 
(unhcr 2014, 6) and 60 percent of women cited societal violence as a principal reason for 
fleeingtheirhomecountries(unhcr2015b,19).thedataforhondurasandguatemala
show that the highest rates of migration are from the departments with the most elevated 
homicide rates.24
23 when asked whether the police protect against crime or are involved in crime, 65.9 percent of
guatemalans, 48.8 percent of salvadorans and 47.2 percent of hondurans said that the police were implicated 
incriminalactivities.innicaraguaonly25.1percentofpeoplesawtheirpoliceasinvolvedincrime(cruz
2011, 24-25). 
24forhondurasthosedepartmentsarecorts,franciscomorazn,atlantida,yoro,comayagua,olancho,
coln,copn,andcholuteca(musaloetal.2015,89-90),whileinguatemalatheyareguatemala,san
marcos, huehuetenango, quetzaltenango, and jutiapa (ibid., 135).

158

journal on migration and human securitychildren and adolescents often make up a disproportionate number of homicide victims. 
in el salvador, over the past ten years, the murder rate for young people between 18 and 
30hasbeentwicethenationallevel,andthosemostaffectedbyviolenceare15to19years
old (musalo et al. 2015, 175). in honduras, the homicide rate among males between the 
ages of 20 and 34 was triple the national level, topping 300 per 100,000 (insight crime 
honduras n.d.). 
thekillingsofwomen,includinggender-motivatedkillings,orfemicides/feminicides
has also been extraordinarily high in the northern triangle countries. from 2007 to 2012, 
el salvador was ranked number one, honduras number two, and guatemala number four 
(gdavd 2015, 94). 
thegrowthofgangshasbeenasignificantcontributingfactortoincreasedlevelsofviolence
(gao2015,4).theunofficeondrugsandcrimeestimatesthatthereare54,000gang
members in the northern triangle countries, with 20,000 in el salvador, 12,000 in honduras, 
and  22,000  in  guatemala  (unodc  2012,  29).  given  that  el  salvadors  population  is 
substantially smaller, in relation to the other two countries, at 20,000 gang members, el 
salvadorhadthehighestconcentration,withsome323mareros (gang members) for every 
100,000citizens,doublethelevelofguatemalaandhonduras(seelke 2014, 3). 
organized  crime  networks  have  also  penetrated  the  region,  adding  to  the  levels  of 
violence.thenortherntrianglecountrieshavethemisfortuneofbeingsituatedinthe
routeconnectingtheworldslargestdrug-producingcountriesinsouthamericawiththe
worldslargestconsumerofillicitdrugs,theunitedstates(stinchcombandhershberger
2014,23).moreover,anti-drugtraffickinginitiativesincolombiaandmexicohavecaused
drugtraffickerstochangetheirroutes.theseroutechangeshavehadadisastrousimpacton
thenortherntrianglecountriesasmexicanandcolombiandrugcartelsarenowfighting
forcontroloflandandmaritimeroutesandenlisting,tovaryingdegrees,thesupportof
lesssophisticatedstreetgangs(ibid.,23).
asdiscussedinsectioniiabove,flawedtransitionswhichallowedtheincorporationof
corrupt state actors into new state institutions have contributed greatly to the criminality 
and levels of violence in the northern triangle countries. state actors have been found 
to support the gangs or to be complicit in their actions. as a consequence, it is extremely 
difficultforvictimstofindrecourseagainstcriminalelementsthroughreportingtothe
policeforceorgovernmentoftheirowncountries.whenunabletofindsafetywithintheir
home countries, victims are migrating to countries where they believe they will be safe. 
an additional factor  one also linked to us policy  was the large-scale deportation of 
gang members from the united states to northern triangle countries, as discussed above. 

violence within the home 

in addition to societal violence, there are high levels of violence against women and children 
within the home. domestic violence is prevalent and widely tolerated. although rates are 
difficulttodiscernduetorampantunderreportingandthefailureofgovernmentstocollect
data,thereisnodoubtthenumbersarehigh(hermansdorfer2012;crcomo2011;bayona
2013; njera 2012). in honduras, for example, three-quarters of over 16,000 violence

159

seeking a rational approach to a regional refugee crisisagainst women complaints filed were based on intimate partner and familial violence
(manjoo 2015). the united nations, moreover, has estimated that around 50 percent of 
femicides/feminicides  are  the  result  of  escalating  intimate  partner  violence  (unodc 
2012). while all three countries have enacted laws25 to prevent and punish violence against 
women, implementation and enforcement of these laws has been limited, and they have yet 
to bring down the prevalence of violence or the impunity enjoyed by its perpetrators.
children are also victims of violence within the home. corporal punishment is accepted, 
and often takes the form of brutal physical abuse (musalo et al. 2015, 66-69, 81, 135, 161). 
incest is also extremely common and generally underreported; among other ills, it has
contributed to high levels of adolescent pregnancies (musalo et al. 2015, iii, viii, 179). 
childrenarealsosubjectedtoforcedlabor,ortraffickedforsexualexploitation.manyare
abandoned by parents or extended family that do not have the means to care for them. all 
three northern triangle countries have enacted extensive child protection laws.26 however, 
25 in el salvador there is a body of law aimed at guaranteeing the right to a life free from violence
forwomen.notableamongtheselawsare:thelawagainstintra-familyviolence;thepenalcode;the
proceduralpenalcode;thespecialandcomprehensivelawforalifefreefromviolenceforwomen;the
lawfortheintegralprotectionofchildrenandadolescents;thelawtoestablishthesalvadoraninstitutefor
thedevelopmentofwomen;andthelawforequality,equityandtheeradicationofdiscriminationagainst
women(musaloetal.2015,176).inhonduras,thedomesticviolenceactisapreventivemechanismto
combat domestic violence. penalties of one to three years, and up to four years in aggravated cases, are set 
underarticle179(a)and(b)ofthecriminalcode.alawagainsttraffickinginpersonswaspassedinapril
2012. the law also sets out the structure and role of the inter-agency commission to combat commercial 
sexualexploitationandtraffickinginpersons(art.7).hondurasalsohasanationalplanonviolenceagainst
women that was adopted in 2014 for the period covering 20142022 (human rights council 2015, 60-
61). additionally, article 118-a of the criminal code criminalizes femicide. in guatemala, the law against 
femicide and other forms of violence against women (ley contra el femicidio y otras formas de violencia 
contra la mujer) was approved in april 2008. prior to this law, the 1996 law to prevent, punish, and eradicate 
family violence (ley para prevenir, sancionar y erradicar la violencia intrafamiliar) addressed violence 
against women (immigration and refugee board of canada 2012).
26inelsalvador,avarietyofnationallawsadvocatesforchildrenindifferentways,amongthem:the
generaleducationlaw(1996);thelawagainstintrafamilialviolence(1996);thepenalcode(2007);the
juvenilepenalcode(1994);thelawforaccesstopublicinformation(2010);thegeneralmedicinelaw
(2012);thevaccinelaw(2012);thegeneralyouthlaw(2012);thespecialandcomprehensivelawfora
lifefreefromviolence(2010);thelawforequality,equityandtheeradicationofdiscriminationagainst
women(2011);theorganiclawsofthepgr(procuraduria general de la repblica, procurator general 
of  the  republic),  fgr  (fiscal  general  de  la  repblica,  general  prosecutor  of  the  republic),  and  pnc 
(polica nacional civil,nationalcivilpolice);thepddhlaw;theorganicjudiciallaw;andthelawon
breastfeeding(2013);andlawfortheintegralprotectionofchildrenandadolescents (lepina) (2009). 
in addition, regulations of the protection system were established in 2012 for conna, the courts for the 
protection of children and adolescents, and the shared protection network (red de atencin campartida 
(rac))(musaloetal.2015,184).in2003,guatemalapassedthepina(proteccin integral de la niez 
y adolescencia)law.accordingtoarticle1,thelawisalegalinstrumentforfamilyintegrationandsocial
promotion that seeks the comprehensive and sustainable development of guatemalan children and adolescents 
withinademocraticframeworkandwithunrestrictedrespectforhumanrights(ibid.,150).hondurasalso
hasasignificantlegalframeworkfortheprotectionofchildren,whicharesetoutinarangeofinstruments,
including: the code for the protection of children and youth (cdigo de la niez y la adolescencia de 
honduras,1996);thelawfortheprotectionofhonduranmigrantsandtheirfamilies(ley de proteccin de 
los hondureos migrantes y sus familiares,2013);theorganiclawofthehonduraninstituteforchildren
and families (orgnica del instituto hondureo de la niez y familia,ihnfa1997);theprotocolforthe
repatriationofchildrenandadolescentvictimsoforvulnerabletotraffickinginpersons,(protocolo para 

160

journal on migration and human securityas is the situation with laws addressing violence against women, there is a wide breach 
between what the laws provide for, and what they have actually accomplished in terms of 
protecting children from harm or punishing those who violate the rights of children (see 
musalo et al. 2015, 116, 150-52,169-70). 

poverty, inequality and the resulting social exclusion

the northern triangle countries have some of the highest levels of poverty in the western 
hemisphere (stinchcomb and hershberger 2014, 16). in 2011, the world bank reported that 
morethan60percentofhondurans,morethan50percentofguatemalans,and30percent
ofsalvadoranslivebelowthepovertyline(gao2015,2).thepovertyiscombinedwith
extreme economic inequalities (gao 2015, 2-3). the top 20 percent of the population of 
the three countries receives more than 50 percent of the income (gao 2015, 3). 
historyprovidessomeexplanationfortheseextremelevelsofpovertyandinequality;they
aretosomedegreethelegaciesofcenturiesoldoligarchicrule[and]decadesof
civilwar[,]asdescribedinsectioniiabove(stinchcombandhershberger2014,16).in
thenortherntrianglecountrieshurricanes,earthquakes,floods,volcaniceruptions,and
landslides add to the poverty and economic inequalities that traverse the region (see wisner 
et al. 2004).27
recent reports focusing on child migration from the northern triangle countries and its root 
causes have noted that social exclusion28 deprives children of the most basic necessities, 
suchasaccesstohousing,education,food,andhealthcare(musaloetal.2015,80-81;
129-130;169-170).certainsegmentsofthepopulationmaybemoreaffectedbythedeep
poverty; for example, in guatemala almost 42 percent of children suffer from chronic
malnutrition, but in the northwest highlands, which has a large indigenous population, the 
malnutrition rate is almost 65 percent (ibid., 13). this desperate poverty prompts many 
children to migrate in search of a home where they might have their basic needs met.

iii. a repeat of the past: us policy towards salvadorans 
and guatemalans in the 1980s
inthe1980swhenmanysalvadoransandguatemalanswerefleeingtheircountriesbrutal
civil wars, the united states did its best to prevent them from reaching our borders. the 
us governments response to those who did manage to arrive was to discourage them from 

la repatriacin de nios, nias y adolescentes victimas o vulnerables a la trata de personas,2006);the
executive decree for the creation of the department on children and families (decreto ejecutivo para la 
creacin de la direccin de niez, adolescencia y familia,dinaf,2014(ibid.,95-96).
27   following a series of natural disasters between 1998 and 2001, the united states granted temporary 
protected  status  (tps)  to  honduran  nationals  (extended  to  january  5,  2018)  and  salvadoran  nationals 
(extended to september 9, 2016), granting nationals of these countries the opportunity to live and work 
legally in the united states (stinchcomb and hershberger 2014, 10-11). 
28 the term social exclusion is used to describe the situation which arises when poverty and gross
inequalitiesarecombinedwithscarcejobsandtheabsenceofstateinstitutionsthatcouldsupplyminimal
resourcesorservices(wisneretal.2004,17).individualsareestrange[ed]frombothlabormarketsand
stateserviceswhichisfarmoredestructivethanpovertyorinequalityperse(ibid.,17).

161

seeking a rational approach to a regional refugee crisismakingclaimstoasylum,andwhenasylumapplicationswerefiled,todenytheclaimsat
recordrates.thiswaslaterrectifiedafterlitigation.now,insteadoflearningfromthem,
the us policies of the past appear to be the script for its current policies. 

1. constructive refoulement

as discussed in section i, the united states has engaged in constructive refoulement by 
pressuring  the  mexican  government  to  prevent  central american  asylum  seekers  from 
reaching  the  southern  border  with  mexico.  as  the  statistics  demonstrate,  mexico  has 
complied,  showing  a  substantial  increase  in  its  deportation  of  migrants  from  central 
america. 
this approach is a page from us policy during the central american refugee crisis of the 
1980s.asdetailedinbillfrelicksseminalarticle,runningthegauntlet:thecentral
american journey in mexico, the united states engaged in constructive refoulement 
during that earlier period too, by engaging in policies intended to interdict central
americansbeforetheyeverreachedtheusborder(frelick1991,211).
frelicks  article  quotes  from  an  internal  immigration  and  naturalization  service  (ins) 
memo,whichdetailshowitwould[p]ressthestatedepartmentand...insliaisonto
securetheassistanceofmexicoandcentralamericancountriestoslowdowntheflowof
illegalaliensintotheunitedstates(frelick1991,211).inadditiontotheinsandstate
department, the central intelligence agency (cia) and the defense intelligence agency 
werealsoinvolved.interdictionoffleeingcentralamericanswasaccomplishedthrough
shared intelligence and increased enforcement along the migration corridor. 
statisticsdemonstratedtherelativesuccessofthisstrategy,withparallelstothepresent
day. the numbers of salvadorans, guatemalans, and hondurans apprehended in the united 
states went down, while the number of apprehensions and deportations in mexico went 
up. between january 1989 and july 1990 mexico summarily deported 165,000 central 
american migrants, pushing them over the border to guatemala. at this time the united 
states  could  not  even  hide  behind  the  pretense  that  the  migrants  had  been  given  the 
opportunity to seek protection in mexico because mexico was not yet a signatory to the 
1951refugeeconventionorits1967protocol,and[t]hestatusofrefugee,asdefinedin
internationalagreements,[did]notexistundermexicanlaw(friedlandandrodriguezy
rodriguez 1987, 53-55).

2. deter and discourage

deterrence policies of today also mirror those implemented in the 1980s and 1990s. for 
example,the1989insinitiativedubbedoperationholdtheline,whichconsistedof
increasedborderenforcementandexpeditedproceedingshadasitsobjectivedetention
and quick deportation[.] one of its explicit objectives was to deter centralamerican
migration (frelick 1991, 210-211). similarly, the current policy of detaining women and 
children in remote detention facilities  not easily accessible to attorneys  coupled with 

162

journal on migration and human securitypolicies that accelerate their court proceedings29 are intended to deter other migrants from 
coming to the united states.
policiesimplementedinthattimeperiodwentbeyonddeterringarrival;similartowhatwe
see in the failures of expedited removal, discussed in section i, the legacy ins of the 1980s 
alsoengagedinactionsintendedtopreventthefilingofclaimsforasylumforthosewho
had reached the united states. these coercive ins policies were successfully challenged in 
a class action lawsuit on behalf of salvadoran asylum seekers. the result was the issuance 
of a permanent injunction, under which the us immigration and naturalization service 
(ins) was enjoined from forcing detainees to sign voluntary departure agreements, required 
to  notify  detainees  of  their  rights  to  political  asylum  and  to  representation  by  counsel, 
andenjoinedfromtransferringdetaineeswhohadsecuredattorneystodifferentdetention
centers.30 the injunction was renewed in 2007 and 2009, and was more recently invoked 
on behalf of salvadoran children who are part of the migrant surge. 

3. deny protection

salvadoransandguatemalansseekingasyluminthe1980swerefleeingbrutalcivilwarsin
which  as has been documented  the clear majority of the human rights violations were 
committed by state actors rather than the guerrilla forces. in the case of guatemala, the state 
engaged in genocide against its indigenous population. the killings, disappearances, and 
torture perpetrated by the governments of el salvador and guatemala were not random, 
but were targeted against actual (or perceived) political opponents  arguably bringing the 
individualsfleeingthesepracticeswithintheambitofthe1980refugeeactsprotection.
notwithstandingthehorrificlevelofabuses,andtheapparentnexusbetweentheactsof
persecution and the victims political opinions, the asylum grant rates for salvadorans and 
guatemalan during that time period were abysmally low, hovering below three percent 
(gzesh 2006). 
one need not look far for a number of explanations for these shamefully low grant rates. 
perhaps foremost is the fact that the united states was a major supporter of the salvadoran 
and guatemalan governments, and it would not look good to implicitly admit  through 
thegrantingofasylum--thatusalliesmilitaryefforts,whichwewerefunding,resulted
in persecution of their citizenry. secondarily, the proximity of these countries to the united 
states via a land route most likely raised fears of that if protection were awarded to some, 
others would follow.
the clear appearance of adjudicatory bias against salvadorans and guatemalans in the 
1980s, demonstrated by the persistently low asylum grant rates, led to a nationwide class 
action  lawsuit  against  the  then-ins.  american  baptist  churches  v.  thornburgh  (abc) 
alleged  a  pattern  and  practice  of  discrimination  in  the  adjudication  of  salvadoran  and 
guatemalanclaimsforasylumandwithholdingofremoval.theplaintiffswereengagedin
extensive discovery when the ins chose to settle the case rather than to go forward with 

29thesekindofexpeditedproceedingshavebeenusedagainstotherdisfavorednationalitygroups;theso-
calledhaitianprogramof1978wasdesignedspecificallytoadjudicate,andtodenyasquicklyaspossible
theasylumclaimsofhaitians(little1983,273).
30   orantes-hernandez v. thornburgh, 919 f. 2d 549 (9th cir. 1990).

163

seeking a rational approach to a regional refugee crisislitigation. a central aspect of the settlement was the inss agreement to re-adjudicate the 
asylum  and  withholding  of  removal  claims  of  every  salvadoran  and  guatemalan  class 
member whose case had been denied. 
the settlement agreement is instructive in its core admissions. it states in relevant part:

[f]oreign policy and border enforcement considerations are not relevant to the
determination  of  whether  an  applicant  for  asylum  has  a  well-founded  fear  of 
persecution;thefactthatanindividualisfromacountrywhosegovernmentthe
united states supports is not relevant to the determination of whether an applicant 
forasylumhasawell-foundedfearofpersecution;whetherornottheunitedstates
government agrees with the political or ideological beliefs of the individual is not 
relevant to the determination of whether an applicant has a well-founded fear of 
persecution;thesamestandardfordeterminingwhetherornotanapplicanthasa
well-founded fear of persecution applies to salvadoran and guatemalans as applies 
to all other nationalities.31

although  the  contemporary  rejection  of  claims  from  salvadorans,  guatemalans,  and 
hondurans lacks the clear foreign policy motivations that led to abc v. thornburgh, there 
are several parallels between the experiences of central americans during the 1980s and 
today that are worth noting. 
first,duringbothtimeperiods,thelevelsofviolenceandhumansufferingintheregion
have been indisputable. second, efforts to deter rather than protect bona fide asylum
seekershavecharacterizedthepoliciesundertaken.third,andperhapsmostsignificantly,
there have been dramatically divergent views on the proper interpretation of the refugee 
definition.
during  the  1980s,  asylum  advocates  argued  that  interpretations  of  the  law  should  be 
informed more by humanitarian ideals than by restrictionist objectives. whether it was 
around  issues  of  burden  of  proof,32 or the meaning of political opinion, they argued
against rigid constructions and formalisms that would result in a denial of protection to 
those  at  great  risk. although  asylum  advocates  won  many  cases,  they  were  unable  to 
preventinterpretationsoftherefugeedefinitionthathavehadanextremelylimitingimpact
on the parameters of protection.33
these limiting interpretations have continued, and  as in earlier times  appear to be 
less motivated by principled decision-making than by a desire to shut the door on certain 
kinds of claims, such as gender-based claims and claims arising from central america. 
forinstance,ithaslongbeenrecognizedthattheparticularsocialgroupgroundinthe
refugeedefinitioncanbeappliedtoprotectpersecutedgroupsnotcoveredbytheotherfour

31   american baptist churches v. thornburgh, 760 f. supp. 796 (n.d. ca 1991).
32   i.n.s. v. stevic,467us407(1983);i.n.s. v. cardoza-fonseca, 480 us 421(1987). 
33itisbeyondthescopeofthisarticletodiscussthemanyjuncturesatwhichuslawadopteddefinitions
which diverged from international norms and severely limited protection. one example would be the us 
supreme courts ruling that on account of requires proof of persecutors motivation (i.n.s.  v.  elias-
zacarias, 502 u.s. 478 (1992)). another example would be the us supreme courts ruling that the risk and 
severity of persecution need not be balanced against the gravity of a crime committed, when applying the 
seriousnon-politicalcrimebartoasylumandwithholding(i.n.s. v. aguirre-aguirre, 526 u.s. 415 (1999).

164

journal on migration and human securityprotected grounds. in a departure from prior precedent, as well as international guidance 
 the requirements for establishing a cognizable particular social group (psg) have been 
modified,makingitmuchmoredifficulttoprovetheseclaims.34 
the majority of claims from the northern triangle countries are based on the psg ground 
oftherefugeedefinition.protectioninthesecaseshasbeengreatlyrestrictedasaresultof
the social distinction and particularity requirements.35
until  recently,  a  restrictive  interpretive  approach  also  characterized  decision-making 
around claims for asylum based on domestic violence. the jurisprudence took a wrong 
turn back in 1999, with the bia reversing an ijs grant of asylum to a guatemalan woman 
whohadfledbrutaldomesticviolence.36 at that time, the outgoing clinton administration 
attempted to set the law on the right track, proposing positive regulations in 2000, and 
vacating the r-a- decision in 2001 (musalo 2010). notwithstanding these measures, it took 
a legal battle of more than 15 years to obtain a precedent decision, matter of a-r-c-g-, 
establishingthatwomenfleeingdomesticviolencecomewithintherefugeedefinition.37 
adjudicators  continue  to  resist  the  application  of  this  precedent,  which  has  resulted  in 
arbitrary  and  inconsistent  decision-making  (bookey  2016,  19). although  the  domestic 
violenceclaimsarenotuniquetocentralamerica,theymakeupasignificantpercentage
of the surge cases. it is one bright spot in a somewhat bleak landscape that there is positive 
jurisprudence applicable to these claims, given their prevalence among central american 
claims. 

iv. recommendations for us policy
the  obama administrations  deterrence-based  approach  to  central american  refugees 
ignored the reality of the humanitarian crisis south of the us-mexico border and violates 
us international and domestic legal obligations. aggressive deterrence tactics have failed 
toaddresstherootcausesofmigrationasreflectedinheightenednumbersofwomen
and  children  from  the  northern  triangle  who  continue  to  arrive    while  leading  to 
serioushumanrightsabusesagainstbonafideasylumseekers.thisfaultyresponsealso
34   matter of acosta,thelandmark1985rulingdefiningparticularsocialgroup(psg),requiredthatthe
characteristics defining the group be immutable or fundamental. beginning in 2006, and without
explanation,thebiaimposedtheadditionalrequirementsofsocialvisibilityandparticularitywhich
madeclaimsbasedonpsgmuchmoredifficulttoestablish(musaloetal.2011,616-617).theincorporation
of these new requirements has been frequently criticized (see nestrud 2012), but the bia position has been 
upheld by many circuit courts of appeals (castillo-arias v. us attyy gen., 445 f.3d 1190 (11thcir.2006);
orellana-monson v. holder, 685 f.3d 511 (5th cir. 2012)).
35   matter of s-e-g-, 24 i&n dec. 579 (bia 2008) (holding that neither youth who refused recruitment into 
agangnortheirfamilymembersconstituteaparticularsocialgroup);matter of e-a-g-, 24 i&n dec. 591 
(bia 2008) (holding that membership in a criminal gang cannot constitute membership in a particular social 
group);matter of m-e-v-g-,26i&ndec.227(bia2014)(holdingthatanimmutablecharacteristicmust
meettherequirementofparticularityandsocialdistinctiontoensurethattheproposedsocialgroup
isperceivedasadistinctanddiscretegroupbysociety,althoughthisdoesnotrequireliteralorocular
visibility);matter of w-g-r-, 26 i&n dec. 208 (bia 2014) (holding that former members of a particular 
gang who have renounced their gang membership does not qualify as a particular social group because the 
designation lacks particularity and is also too broad and subjective). 
36  matter of r-a-, 22 i. & n. dec. 906 (bia 1999)
37  matter of a-r-c-g-, 26 i&n dec. 388 (bia 2014).

165

seeking a rational approach to a regional refugee crisiscontravenes the united states moral duty to address its historical role in the northern 
triangles humanitarian crisis, as well as its moral leadership in refugee and human rights 
protection. we recommend that the united states immediately take the following steps: 
  recognize  the  humanitarian  crisis  occurring  within  the  northern  triangle 
countries and the legitimate need of individuals from these countries for refugee 
protection.  the united states should immediately recognize those fleeing from el
salvador, honduras, and guatemala as a refugee population and tailor all policies in 
accordance with a protection-based approach, informed by humanitarian principles and 
domestic and international refugee obligations. failure to do so has led to a raft of 
misinformed,abusivepoliciesbyusauthoritiesaswellaslawenforcementofficials
in mexico and central america. taken together, such policies violate myriad rights of 
refugees, including their fundamental right to non-refoulement. us government action 
mustreflectratherthancontravenetheinternationally-anddomestically-recognized
right of individuals to seek asylum.

  cease funding enforcement efforts aimed at stopping the flow of refugees through 
mexico and the northern triangle countries, and shift funding to protection efforts. 
the us government should immediately cease funding, training, and encouraging the 
governments of mexico, honduras, el salvador, and guatemala to interdict asylum 
seekers. aggressive  enforcement  action  preventing  refugees  from  journeying  north 
to seek protection risks the return of migrant children and families to persecution or 
torture. funding that promotes military and police action against bona fide asylum
seekers should end entirely. funding for immigration authorities should shift to support 
the capacity of mexico and other countries to screen migrants for protection needs and 
vulnerabilities and to strengthen countries asylum systems, including the provision of 
full due process protections. 

  end  family  detention.  dhs  must  immediately  cease  its  inhumane  and  misguided 
deterrence strategy of locking away asylum seeker children and their parents in family 
detention. there is simply no humane way to incarcerate refugee children. depriving 
children of their liberty in remote, for-profit, prison-like detention centers is both
morally repugnant and illegal. numerous studies have shown alternatives to detention 
tobeeffectiveinensuringappearanceatcourthearings(noferi2015;mrsusccb
and cms 2015).38 family detention serves no legitimate purpose  it has not in fact 
deterredrefugeefamiliesfromfleeingfortheirlivesandhascauseddirectharmto
childrens mental, emotional, and physical wellbeing. 

  end raids of central american families and children. raids of central american 
families  and  children  have  terrorized  immigrant  communities,  spreading  fear, 
misinformation,  and  trauma.  as  a  result  of  raids,  immigrant  children  and  trauma 
survivors have even ceased seeking medical treatment and attending school. the raids 
raiseseriousconstitutionalconcernsandhavealsoresultedinthereturnofbonafide

38   alternatives to detention programs have extremely high rates of compliance. one study found that, from 
2011to2013,95percentofparticipantsinthefull-serviceprogramofferedbytheiceintensivesupervision
appearance program (isap) appeared at their scheduled removal hearings (noferi 2015, 2). additionally, a 
2000 study by the vera institute of justice found an 83 percent rate of full court appearance among asylum 
seekers found to have a credible fear via the expedited removal process (noferi 2015). 

166

journal on migration and human securityasylum seekers who never had a chance to present their claims in court. dhs should 
cease these raids and focus limited law enforcement resources on more appropriate 
prioritiesforremovalnotvulnerablemothersandchildrenfleeingpersecution.

  end the use of expedited removal and reinstatement of removal against asylum 
seekers from central america. dhs should immediately cease using both expedited 
removal and reinstatement proceedings for all asylum seekers from central america. 
curtailed procedures are neither appropriate nor necessary in light of the humanitarian 
crisisintheregionandthebonafidenatureofasylumclaimsarisingfromelsalvador,
honduras, and guatemala. credible fear and reasonable fear screening processes are 
tooflawedtopermitmeaningfulscreeningforwomenandchildrenfleeingpersecution
and thus using these processes results in refoulement of refugees in violation of law. to 
the extent that individuals lack meritorious claims, normal immigration procedures in 
immigration court can ensure removal of those with no relief. in particular, dhs should 
never subject children to expedited screening, even when they arrive with families. 
child cases require an appropriate setting, adequate time, and heightened safeguards to 
ensure correct outcomes. expedited removal of children arriving with families, by its 
very nature, provides none of these necessary protections. 

  cease  to  accelerate  immigration  proceedings  for  unaccompanied  children  and 
adults with children, including asylum interviews of children. accelerating cases 
of vulnerable asylum seekers, and in particular families and unaccompanied children, 
placesthematriskofremovaltopersecutionandharm.rocketdocketscreateserious
barriers to obtaining counsel, particularly since many of the lawyers are representing 
clients on a pro bono basis,andimpedetheabilityofthosefortunateenoughtofind
attorneystoadequatelypreparetheircases.theexecutiveofficeforimmigrationreview
(eoir) should cease to accelerate the initial court hearings of children and families and 
ensure that immigration judges grant appropriate continuances to individuals seeking 
counsel. in addition, us citizenship and immigration services should not accelerate 
the  asylum  interviews of  unaccompanied children unless  requested to  do  so  by  the 
applicant (uscis 2015). childrens cases require careful development over time, as 
attorneys need to establish rapport and build trust, particularly with children who have 
sufferedtraumaorgender-basedviolenceandarereluctanttorevealabusetopeople
they do not know well. 

  analyze asylum claims in a manner consistent with international law and guidance 
on the proper definition of a refugee.  the  united  states  should  immediately  and 
publicly clarify that claims based on violence by gangs and organized criminal syndicates 
may be a basis for asylum, and should cease adopting contrary positions before the 
federal courts and within its own agencies. as a matter of law, asylum determinations 
must be made on a case-by-case basis, and numerous courts have granted claims based 
on violence at the hands of criminal gangs. in addition, the administration should adopt 
positions in litigation and/or issue regulations that clarify asylum standards consistent 
with international law and guidance. this should include clarifying that membership in 
a particular social group requires only that members share an immutable or fundamental 
characteristic. 

167

seeking a rational approach to a regional refugee crisis  expand and fund access to counsel for asylum seekers, and in particular central 
american  children  and  families.  the  administration  should  expand  funding  for 
counsel for asylum seekers in general, and in particular for central american children 
and families. studies have shown that counsel is critical to the outcomes of asylum 
cases. unaccompanied children with counsel are five times more likely to obtain
asylum or other relief than unrepresented children; and families with counsel are
fourteentimesmorelikelytoprevailthanunrepresentedfamilies(trac2015a;trac
2015b). although we commend the obama administration for having provided funding 
for many unaccompanied children in removal proceedings, the united states should 
increase the scope and scale of funded representation. children, both unaccompanied 
and  with  families,  should  never  be  forced  to  defend  themselves  without  counsel 
against a government attorney. in addition, in light of the complexity of asylum law, 
thedefensivenatureofimmigrationcourtproceedings,andthebonafidenatureof
claims  from  the  region,  the  government  should  expand  funding  for  asylum  seekers 
from central america in general.

  fund programs that address root causes of migration in el salvador, honduras, 
and guatemala, and in particular those that ameliorate the social exclusion, lack 
of social support, and risk factors underlying violence and persecution. funding 
for the northern triangle countries has largely focused on law enforcement and military 
backing, such as through the central america regional security initiative (carsi). 
thisapproachraisessignificantconcernsduetowell-documentedhumanrightsabuses
committed by military and police. moreover, security-based approaches by and large 
fail in the long-term because they address only the symptoms rather than the underlying 
conditionsthatallowviolenceandpersecutiontoflourish.fundingshouldinsteadfocus
ondiminishingpovertyanditsresultingsocialexclusion;increasingemploymentand
educationalopportunities;amelioratingexistingsocietalinequalityanddiscrimination;
buildingcommunity-basedresources;strengtheningchildwelfareprotectionsystems;
and improving judicial capacity and governmental transparency. 
improve, expand, and strengthen in-country refugee processing for individuals in 
guatemala, honduras, and el salvador. the united states should expand in-country 
processing for both adults and children in need of refugee protections in the northern 
triangle countries. in particular, it should expand the cam program to include any 
childwhowouldmeetthedefinitionofarefugee,includingchildrenwhodonothave
parents with legal status in the united states. all children in need of refugee protection 
  irrespective  of  their  parents  status    are  vulnerable  to  serious  abuse  in  the 
increasingly dangerous journey north through irregular channels. by excluding many of 
these children based on the immigration status of their parents, the cam program fails 
to address the protection needs of children in el salvador, honduras, and guatemala. in 
addition, in-country processing for adults and families should be expanded. the recent 
expansion of the cam program and the collaborations with the government of costa 
rica,unhcr,andiomareencouragingdevelopments;however,theusgovernment
should broaden refugee processing and protection in the region further. 

 

  grant temporary protected status to individuals from guatemala, honduras, and 
el salvador. althoughweurgethefullrecognitionandprotectionofthosefleeing
persecution from the northern triangle as refugees through the above measures, dhs 

168

journal on migration and human securityshould  also  enact  temporary  protections  to  ensure  that  no  individuals  are  deported 
backtopersecution.specifically,theunitedstatesshoulddesignatethenationalsof
guatemala,  honduras,  and  el  salvador  for  temporary  protected  status  (tps).  tps 
provides relief from the risk of immediate deportation as well as work authorization 
(althoughitdoesnotprovideapathtomorepermanentprotectionandbenefits,asdoes
asylum).39 currently, some nationals of honduras and el salvador hold tps, but only 
if they entered before 1999 and 2001, respectively. the administration should designate 
all three northern triangle countries for tps status, including for recent entrants. 

