immigration adjudication: the 
missing rule of law

lenni b. benson 
new york law school

executive summary
the united states spends more than $19 billion each year on border and 
immigration  enforcement.1  the  obama  administration  removed  more 
people in eight years than the last four administrations combined.2 yet, to 
the trump administration, enforcement is not yet robust enough. among 
other measures, the administration favors more expedited and summary 
removals. more than 80 percent3 of all removal orders are already issued 
outside  the  court  process:  when  the  department  of  homeland  security 
(dhs)  uses  summary  removal  processes,  both  access  to  counsel  and  an 
immigration judge can be nearly impossible. advocates and policy analysts 
are equally concerned that a backlog of over 545,000 immigration court cases 
creates delay that harm people seeking asylum and other humanitarian 
protection. recent use of priority or rocket dockets in immigration court 
and  lack  of  appointed  counsel  also  interfere  with  the  fair  adjudication 
of claims. thus the administrative removal system is criticized both for 
being inefficient and moving too slowly, on the one hand, and for moving 
too quickly without adequate procedural safeguards, on the other. both 
critiques  have  merit.  the  challenge  is  to  design,  implement,  and  most 
critically, maintain an appropriately balanced adjudication system. 
while it is clear that us removal procedures need reform, process alone 
will not be able to address some of the systematic flaws within the system. 
ultimately,  the  dhs  will  need  to  refine  and  prioritize  the  cases  that 
are placed into the system and the government needs new tools, widely 
used in other adjudication systems, that can reduce backlogs, incentivize 
cooperation, and facilitate resolution. congress should similarly reexamine 
the  barriers  to  status  and  avenues  for  regularization or  preservation  of 
status. the paucity of equitable forms or relief and the lack of statutes 
of  limitation  place  stress  on  the  immigration  court  system.  the  lack 
1   in fiscal year (fy) 2016, the budget for cbp and ice was $19.3 billion. see analysis by the american 
immigration council (2017a) about the costs of immigration enforcement. the budget for the immigration 
court  has  grown  only  30  percent  in  comparison  with  a  70  percent  increase  in  the  budget  of  the  dhs 
enforcement.
2   taken from obama removal data and comparison to past administrations (arthur 2017). 
3   the dhs does not routinely publish full statistical data that allows a comparison of the forms of removal. in 
a recent report by the congressional research service, the analyst concluded that 44 percent were expedited 
removals as described below, and an additional 39 percent were reinstatement of removals  83 percent of 
all orders of removal were outside the full immigration court system (congressional research service 2015). 

 2017 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 5 number 2 (2017): 331-355of  appointed  counsel  has  a  dramatic  impact  on  case  outcomes.  without 
counsel, the rule of law is barely a constraint on government authority. 
conversely, a system of appointed counsel could lead to efficiencies and to a 
culture of negotiation and settlement within the immigration court system.
dhs has increasingly used every tool in its arsenal to expeditiously remove 
people  from  the  united  states  and  most  of  these  tools  bypass  judicial 
hearings.  in  these  ministerial  or  expedited  forms  of  removal,  there  is 
no courtroom, there is no administrative judge, and there are rarely any 
opportunities for legal counsel to participate. moreover, there is rarely an 
opportunity for federal judicial review. in these settings, the rule of law 
is  entirely  within  the  hands  of  immigration  and  customs  enforcement 
(ice) or customs and border protection (cbp) officers who serve as both 
prosecutor and judge. there is little record keeping and almost no avenue 
for administrative or judicial review. this paper will argue that the rule 
of law is missing in the us removal adjudication system, and will propose 
ways in which it can be restored.

assembly  line  adjudication    the  need  for  priorities 
and process protections
for many years, the dhs has increased removal enforcement and congress has similarly 
increased the funding for detention as a part of the removal process. in 1990, congress 
revised the statutes to create an integrated immigration removal system that would both 
adjudicate  the  claims  of  those  seeking  initial  admission  or  apprehended  at  entry  and 
those who are found in the interior and subject to a ground of deportation. over time, the 
adjudications before the immigration courts, a division within the department of justice, 
grew to over 200,000 new cases a year (eoir 2017).4 frustrated with delays and intent on 
stiffer enforcement at the border with mexico, the federal agencies expanded their reliance 
on forms of ministerial or expedited removal.5 today at least 80 percent of all removal 
orders  are  prepared  and  executed  largely  without  the  involvement  of  an  immigration 
judge. in these cases, only a claim of persecution or torture can prevent a rapid deportation 
executed solely by dhs personnel. in many of these cases, the unrepresented individual is 
unable to persuade an immigration judge that a fuller hearing is required. 
the growing reliance on expedited procedures has raised concerns about the adequacy and 
accuracy of the agency determinations. in a detailed report published in the summer of 2016, 
the us commission on international religious freedom (uscirf) reported that customs 

4   the executive office for immigration review (eoir) publishes a statistical yearbook annually providing 
data on cases types, dispositions and completions. the data here is from fy 2016. 
5   congress first created the expedited removal statute in 1996 but has expanded its use to people found 
within 14 days and within 100 miles of the international land borders and to those apprehended who admit 
arriving by sea within the past two year. under ina  235; 8 u.s.c.  1225, the dhs is only to use the 
procedure if a person is inadmissible for specific grounds, lack of documents, or making a misrepresentation 
or using fraud to secure a visa. however, the lack of records and administration review precludes knowing 
if the border officials constrain themselves to these contexts. the new administration is exploring expanding 
the use of expedited removal to the entire interior provided the individual arrived within the last two years.

332

journal on migration and human securityand border protection (cbp) officers were not well trained or adequately supervised in their 
use of the expedited process. in addition, the need for protection determinations caused a 
shift in resources from the immigration court and the us citizenship and immigration 
services (uscis) asylum office that led to tremendous backlogs in the regular adjudications 
(cassidy and lynch 2016). although some legal challenges to the fairness and accuracy 
of expedited removal have been attempted, most have failed because congress curtails 
access to independent judicial review. in april of 2017, the supreme court denied review 
of a decision that refused to entertain jurisdiction to review the sufficiency of the expedited 
removal  process  for  mothers  and  young  children  seeking  asylum.  in  that  decision,  the 
third circuit court of appeals found that congress may constitutionally preclude judicial 
review, including suspending the writ of habeas corpus.6 in short, the rule of law is missing 
in immigration removal adjudication.
even for those who are in regular removal proceedings, the quality and fairness of the 
procedures  and  the  independence  of  the  immigration  court  is  a  significant  concern. 
immigration judges (ijs) are civil service employees that serve at the pleasure of the attorney 
general. the immigration court is not an independent agency. it has coordinated its work 
with the enforcement units within dhs and has adapted its court-docketing procedures 
and relocated judges based on the enforcement priorities of the new administration. the 
national association of immigration judges (naij), the american bar association (aba), 
and  others  have  long  called  for  greater  financial  and  managerial  independence  as  well 
as greater protections for the independence of the adjudicators making these important 
decisions (aba commission on immigration 2010). as dana marks, the president of the 
naij, has phrased it, we are conducting death penalty cases in a traffic court setting 
(dooling 2016).7
moreover, while immigration courts determine whether the government has established 
that a person is removable, it may also be the only place where an individual can seek 
protection from deportation. these are two distinct roles. while the forms of protections 
are limited, congress has given immigration judges the power to make decisions in cases 
seeking asylum or protection against torture. for a small class of people, the ij may be the 
only adjudicator with jurisdiction to determine if a noncitizen will be able to remain based 
on length of residence, extreme hardship to family, and/or surviving forms of domestic 
violence. in reality, congress has narrowed these forms of relief so dramatically that less 
than 35 to 39 percent of the people in removal proceedings file any formal application for 
relief (eoir 2017, figure 13).8
at first blush, the fact that so few people file applications for relief may imply that there is 
little need for the court, but in fact, dhs makes a great number of prosecutorial discretion 
determinations during the court process. it often decides to place individuals in removal 
proceedings. yet, dhs also often agrees to close, or for the court, to terminate cases: in 
fiscal year (fy) 2015, 34 percent of the cases without a grant of relief or a final order of 

6   see castro v. united states dept of homeland sec., 835 f3d 422 (3d cir. 2016), cert. denied, _ u.s. _, 
(april 17, 2017).
7   see also marks (2012).
8   in fy 2015, the rate was 35 percent and grew to 39 percent in fy 2016 (ibid.).

333

immigration adjudication: the missing rule of lawremoval were closed or terminated. this number grew to 38 percent in 2016 (eoir 2017).9 
at times, the case is terminated because it was improvidently begun, but in the vast majority 
of cases the government determines the case should not move forward to a removal order. 
the government may close the case because the removal hearing might have motivated 
the individual to apply for an immigration benefit or relief. there is little need for the 
immigration court involvement if the individual is going to qualify for an immigration 
benefit from uscis.10 while administrative closure or termination is appropriate in these 
cases, some cases should never have been initiated or should have been closed as soon as 
a possibility of status was identified.
some of the delays in the regular removal system occur because persons in proceedings are 
given continuances to try to secure counsel. but the immigration court lacks robust motion, 
conferencing, and settlement traditions. while the procedural rules contemplate motions 
and written pleadings, the tradition in the system is to do everything in front of the judge. 
thus, attorney time and court time is filed with routine submission of documents, oral 
motions, and more requests for continuances that could be better managed. moreover, many 
of the applications for relief cannot be adjudicated by the immigration court. the system 
created by congress and dhs is replete with hard-to-fathom and rigid jurisdictional limits 
that cause cases to be broken into pieces and divided among a variety of benefits agencies. 
immigration courts cannot expedite the security check, petition adjudication, or document 
review process because these functions are handled by a separate agency. and some of 
the rules require hours of court time to make factual findings that could be resolved by 
stipulation between the parties if the dhs would afford greater autonomy to its attorneys. 
the removal system lacks needed flexibility to allow for appropriate adjudication. 
but  regardless  of  the  court  process,  one  of  the  biggest  factors  in  immigration  court 
congestion is the assembly line or automatic initiation of removal proceedings by dhs. 
most  federal  agencies  cannot  prosecute  every  violation  nor  pursue  every  enforcement 
action. immigration prosecutions are a form of civil administrative adjudications. the 
entire  system  is  predicated  on  the  characterization  that  the  sanctions  for  immigration 
enforcement are primarily civil sanctions assessed by administrative judges. the structure 
of the immigration and nationality act (ina) gives the dhs border inspector insufficient 
flexibility and authority to avoid the removal process. but even within the interior of the 
country, it appears that the dhs is using the initiation of removal proceedings as a rough 
way to sort out who deserves some form of discretion. in general, because the charging 
documents  are  prepared  and  filed  without  formal  consideration  and  evaluation  by  the 
prosecuting attorneys, it is not until the litigation has commenced that a dhs attorney 
examines  the  case.  a  well-defended  individual  will  use  the  court  process  to  explore 

9   these numbers are based on comparing tabs b and c in eoir (2017). likely the numbers are higher than 
past years because many of the cases involved unaccompanied children who were eligible for relief or could 
not be safely repatriated. see discussion of outcomes in juvenile cases below.
10    a  clear  example  of  this  is  the  large  number  of  unaccompanied  childrens  cases.  the  benefits  and 
applications that protect children are all made before a component of the uscis. for most of the cases, the 
immigration court serves little purpose other than to move the case to another continuance. of course, it is 
because the children are in removal that so many attorneys have stepped forward to volunteer to assist them, 
or that the childrens relatives have found the funds to hire the counsel who are essential to the application 
process. none of the work is simple and certainly the applications cannot be made by children unassisted by 
counsel.

334

journal on migration and human securitythe equities in the clients life with the ice attorney and to try to negotiate a closure or 
termination, or to narrow issues to allow the immigration judge to adjudicate the underlying 
eligibility for a form of statutory relief. unfortunately, because there is no right to appointed 
counsel for indigent individuals, and because there is no formal mechanism or culture of 
prioritizing cases once within the system, the results are uneven. the rule of law exists, in 
large part, between the lines.
 and finding justice between the lines is especially a problem for those behind bars. each 
year dhs detains nearly 400,000 people a year. for those who must complete a removal 
hearing in detention, fewer than 20 percent secure any legal representation (eagly and 
schafer 2015).11 the strategies that aid a closure may not exist in the context of a detained 
case. congress mandates detention in a large number of cases as a means of efficiently 
completing the removal process. the calculus of who qualifies for relief and what type 
of hearings may be required is distorted by the stark reality of detention. most detention 
centers are in remote locations and there are few defense attorneys nearby. the court itself 
has increasingly relied on video teleconferencing to conduct the hearings in these facilities. 
video  technology  frequently  separates  the  ice  attorney  from  the  person  in  removal 
proceedings, and the opportunities for negotiation or requests for discretion may be even 
harder to initiate in these settings. the court does not publish annual statistics on its use 
of  teleconferencing  but  a  recent  academic  study  reported  that  by  2012  one-third  of  all 
detained hearings used video technology (eagly 2015, 953).12 

there  is  no  other  forum  for  adjudication    the 
immigration court is the cauldron
the large number of terminations and closures by the dhs suggests that our government 
should be making a careful selection of cases before the allegations are filed in the court. 
the lack of other forums for adjudications  for procedures to regularize status and for a 
method of investigating the context and equities in a case  makes the immigration court 
the default forum. the closure of cases may be the governments only tool to consider the 
equities, given the rigidity of immigration law and its paucity of substantive options and 
pathways to status.
people  are  frequently  surprised  to  learn  that  there  is  no  general  power  within  the 
immigration system for a judge to consider all of the factors and make a recommendation 
against removal. immigration court is not a court of equity. the immigration judge has only 
the powers of grace afforded by congress, and our statutes have increasingly limited relief 
and narrowed the relevant criteria for eligibility. for many years, congress has restricted 
access to permanent resident status or waivers of deportation. there is often no application 
to file because the law precludes ij discretion.
and in the outside-the-court ministerial removals, there is almost no opportunity to apply 
for  a  waiver  or  any  form  of  discretionary  relief.  individuals  facing  reinstatement  of  a 
prior removal order or expedited removal have a limited chance to seek protection from 
persecution or torture, but little else is available. because there are so few ways to stop 
11    eagly and schafer (2015) found that 14 percent of people in detention were represented by counsel.
12   according to eagly (2015), 97.7% of removal proceedings in 2012 received pure in-person adjudication. 

335

immigration adjudication: the missing rule of lawremoval, persons in proceedings try to find a way to fit into the narrow protection grounds 
like  asylum.  nevertheless,  when  individuals  seek  immigration  review,  the  initial  dhs 
finding of lack of fear is reversed in a significant percentage of cases (eoir 2017).13
in  recent  years,  one  of  the  largest  subset  of  cases  are  those  of  unaccompanied  minor 
children arriving from the northern triangle states of central america where a crumbling 
civil society and systemic violence against youth have pushed children to seek safety in the 
united states. these youth frequently choose the united states as a destination because 
many have us resident relatives who may or may not have status. dhs maintains that all 
children identified at or near the border must be placed in removal proceedings and for three 
years its enforcement priorities included these recent arrivals, whose cases were placed onto 
priority dockets. similarly, at the request of the dhs, the immigration courts also prioritized 
the cases of adults with small children who also arrived from the region seeking asylum. 
in 2017, the court announced that it would no longer prioritize the cases of non-detained 
children. nevertheless thousands of childrens cases remain pending in immigration court. 
children with counsel secure status or receive administrative closure at relatively high rates. 
using the court cauldron to sort and process juvenile cases is unnecessary. moreover, this 
setting is poorly suited to consider childrens claims. the attempt to rely solely on docket 
management tools in these cases rather than to examine the entire system  from initiation 
of removal to benefits adjudication  epitomizes the systems lack of flexibility. a careful 
look at the process used in childrens cases would identify larger systemic problems. for 
example, when a child wants to seek a special immigrant juvenile petition, the immigration 
court is powerless to adjudicate every aspect of the petition. instead, it must continue the 
case while the child, if represented, goes first to state juvenile or family court and then to 
the benefits division of uscis and finally back to the court to seek closure of the case. 
none of these steps are simple. all require advocacy and lengthy adjudication procedures. 
these procedures congest already overcrowded dockets. 
the current removal systems were largely designed in 1990 and relief and judicial review 
were substantially restricted in 1996. in the past 20 years, the immigration enforcement 
budgets  and  the  numbers  of  people  affected  by  the  system  have  grown  exponentially. 
all legal systems are dynamic. over time, they bend, twist, clog, and even break. people 
desiring  a  more  restrictive  immigration  policy,  as  well  as  those  seeking  more  paths  to 
regularization  of  status,  agree  that  the  us  removal  adjudication  system  has  reached  a 
breaking point. factors such as the high dependence on physical detention, the immense 
volume of cases, the growing numbers of children in the system, the lack of transparency, 
and the near impossibility of substantive review in more than 80 percent of the cases call 
into the question the effectiveness, fairness, and accuracy of the us removal adjudication 
system. 

13    from  the  2016  eoir  statistical  yearbook,  credible  fear  review  reflects  a  reversal  of  the  agency 
determination in a significant number of cases. in fy 2015, the ij reversed the credible fear denial 1,344 
times out of 6,629 (20 percent) and in fy 2016, the percentage rose to 27 percent in 2086 out of 7,469 cases. 
the reversal is lower in the reinstatement cases or defense to administrative removal under ina  238. in fy 
2015, there were 449 reversals out of 2,587 (20 percent). in fy 2016, there were 567 reversals out of 2,522 
(22 percent). these rates of reversal argue strongly for more process, greater transparency, and oversight 
rather than leaving these decisions solely to dhs determinations.

336

journal on migration and human securitythe essentials for adjudication
there is no perfect adjudication system. these systems should protect values like accuracy 
and fairness, and operate efficiently. however, ultimately, the demands placed on a system 
and the people acting within it can frustrate the goals of its designers or negate individual 
protections  (aba  commission  on  immigration  2010;  benson  and  wheeler  2012). 
unfortunately, the us system is so far from perfect and so driven by the goals of efficiency 
and deterrence that its fails to incorporate the essential qualities of fairness. moreover, the 
adjudication system does not operate in a vacuum. if us immigration policies allowed 
people to regularize their status, had a mechanism for correcting errors of judgment, or 
contained fines or punishments for breaking immigration rules that were proportionate to 
the interests at stake, it is very likely that it would not be under the current strain. people are 
subject to removal because the system blocks their path to status or makes them vulnerable 
to expulsion even after lengthy residence. too many people are also in removal because 
the united states has no effective mechanism for processing refugee flows at our border 
(musalo and lee 2017).
substantive rights and procedural structures are not separate. if we have a rigid system 
that excludes and punishes all who infringe on even minor rules, people will, by necessity, 
use the adjudication process as a substitute for substantive protection. delay is a partial 
win. and just as frequently, if the individual lacks a remedy, he or she is more likely to do 
everything possible to avoid detection and to remain outside the law.
furthermore,  all  of  the  basic  assumptions  about  the  rule  of  law  or  due  process  or 
basic constitutional rights, do not fully operate in the sphere of immigration law. in the 
immigration context, congress has the power to define both the rules as to who will be 
admitted and the level of procedural protections necessary to evaluate claims. in a handful 
of cases, the supreme court has found that some noncitizens by virtue of their formal status 
or their connections to the united states and, most commonly, by virtue of their physical 
presence within us territory are entitled to due process of law.14 but due process alone 
without a corresponding robust limit on government power to deport may be insufficient. 
the process may always seem unfair and stacked in favor of the government if congress 
does  not  provide  any  formal  mechanism  for  individual  clemency  or  adequate  paths  to 
regularization of status.
phrased another way, the current immigration system and the case law creates very real 
borders  not the territorial borders  but legal fictions that put immigrants outside the 
mainstream body of fundamental protections. immigrants are remarkably vulnerable to 
a government official who oversteps, to a judge who acts in an arbitrary fashion, to the 
asymmetry of the power between the government attorney and the unrepresented detained 
individual. the us immigration system runs roughshod over hundreds of thousands of 
people each year and it creates uncertainty and fear for noncitizens and their families. 

14   see, e.g., landon v. plasencia, 459 u.s. 21 (1982), in which returning lawful permanent resident, although 
at the border, was entitled to a measure of procedural fairness and remanding for application of mathews v. 
eldridge procedural due process balancing; and demore v. hyung joon kim, 538 us 510 (2003), which 
acknowledges due process rights of people inside the united states, but finding detention may be permitted. 
note that the supreme court is revisiting the ability to detain without bond review in rodriguez v. robbins, 
804 f.3d 160 (9th cir. 2015), cert. granted, 136 s.ct. 2489, renamed jennings v. rodriguez, decision pending 
as of march 2017.

337

immigration adjudication: the missing rule of lawthe hallmarks of a just system
the  legal  philosopher  john  rawls  (1971)  in  his  book,  a  theory  of  justice,  created  a 
thought experiment. he asked us to consider what type of governmental system and respect 
for human rights we would design if we didnt know what status or role we would play 
in the new system. if operating behind a veil of ignorance would we create a system 
with a balance of rights and protections to limit governmental power? to be fair, rawls 
expressly designed his experiment assuming that the participants were all citizens creating 
a nation-state. but others, such as the philosopher joseph carens (2013), have carefully 
explained that the process of design without regard to our individual privilege or status 
is also a tool that allows us to ethically examine the choices we make about borders and 
immigration controls. as some have put it, the lottery of birthplace does not fully justify 
the rule of law drawing distinctions amongst individuals. a system that values protections 
for individual liberty and protections for substantive rights to remain with family should 
be more extensive for those with long tenure in a country regardless of the manner of 
entry.  international  law  already  mandates  both  procedural  and  substantive  protections 
for  individuals  who  face  a  threat  of  violence  in  their  country  of  origin.  constitutional 
values have routinely slowed administrative process and added robust notice and hearing 
procedures tempering mere efficiency or speed in adjudication. scholars have long noted 
that a system with redundancy and appeals offers a better adjudication process, builds trust 
in outcomes, and can help to ensure accuracy. records of proceedings, transparency and 
review protect against undue bias in adjudication and can identify patterns of selective, 
perhaps discriminatory, prosecution. 
the  us  removal  system  does  not  adequately  reflect  these  essential  values.  more  than 
80 percent of all removals take place without a hearing before a judge. without records 
of proceedings, opportunities for appeal or adjudication before an independent decision 
maker, the us system is vulnerable to error, bias, and corruption. given the importance 
of the issues involved, such as asylum claims or the right to retain permanent residence, 
the us system does not afford sufficient time and resources for careful development of 
evidence and evaluation of complex legal analysis. if the united states values efficiency, it 
is difficult to understand why so many cases are referred for removal proceedings and then 
closed as a matter of prosecutorial discretion. at first blush, it may appear that the lengthy 
backlog and months to completion of removal cases may argue for less process, but the 
lack of counsel in proceedings and the culture within the courts system may be among the 
largest contributors to delay. 

truncated  process  and  lack  of  substantive  protection 
lead to systemic problems
for many of those subject to it, the us removal adjudication system does not adequately 
balance efficiency, accuracy, and fairness. placed behind the theoretical veil of ignorance 
and unaware if he or she would be a noncitizen in removal, few people would design the 
truncated procedures used in so many of the cases. most people would be dissatisfied with 
the removal and detention system if they knew it would impact them or their close family 
members. most would argue for greater process, a right to counsel, options for discretion, 
or clemency and protection from arbitrary or dangerous refoulement.

338

journal on migration and human securitytraditionally, legal scholars have said that to build a fair adjudication system, the government 
must ensure that the administrative process balances efficiency with the goals of accuracy 
and fairness. usually these commentators also assume that the system will be transparent 
and provide records of the proceedings. evidentiary rules, the right to counsel, and the right 
to appeal are all hallmarks of protections built into adjudication to ensure accuracy and 
fairness. in expedited removal cases, people receive a removal order moments after arrival 
that forever impedes their ability to regularize their status. persons who use the visa waiver 
program to enter and overstay a visa are not entitled to a hearing despite years of residence. 
people who are apprehended in the interior or who have held lawful status but are now 
charged with being removable do have a right to an administrative hearing, but congress 
has foreclosed the opportunity  in most cases  for individual equitable assessments. 
for some, dhs has the ability to use a conviction to eliminate substantive relief before 
the court and to narrow the scope and nature of any appeals or judicial review. for others, 
there is no remedy, and despite years of living in the united states, even those brought 
as children, congress has left them without a remedy before a court. the only shaky and 
unreliable remedy is to try to seek prosecutorial discretion in the hope that the government 
will not initiate removal proceedings or execute a removal.
it is a worthy endeavor to try to identify the characteristics of a removal system that would 
protect  the  essential  values  of  adjudication.15  however,  no  mere  process  scheme  can 
adequately protect individual rights if it truncates or curtails the scope and presentation 
of  claims. while  on  paper,  our  expedited  removal  system  might  seem  to  protect  some 
values of accuracy and additional process for those who fear harm, in reality, the balance 
is skewed solely toward government efficiency. the united states has lost sight of the 
core  values  that  protect  an  adjudication  model  (and  those  subject  to  it)  from  arbitrary 
determinations and that promote the rule of law. while in the main congress has crafted the 
us immigration system, the manner in which the executive branch wields its enforcement 
tools is equally, if not more, powerful in constructing a system that honors the rule of law. 
in many areas of administrative law, the federal courts act as a tempering and moderating 
force, but in the immigration field, congress has severely limited the power of the judiciary 
to impose limits on the enforcement choices or to fail to exercise discretion. most of the 
power in the system is allocated to the governments power to remove and little is afforded 
to the adjudicators to make case-by-case assessments. the number of dead ends, automatic 
grounds for deportation, and barriers to status far outnumber the discretionary exceptions. 
only where congress has chosen to protect a small number of victims of crime or domestic 
violence, or where international treaty is enshrined in our domestic law, does the system 
prioritize an individualized assessment of harm over the authority of the government to 
deport.  this  imbalance,  the  very  generous  allocation  of  power  solely  to  enforcement, 
creates the harsh reality of our immigration system. 

recommendations
suggested here are some standards and characteristics of a removal system that would 
go  further  to  promote  fair  outcomes  and  still  preserve  the  governments  enforcement 
15   other scholars have written important pieces that evaluate these values. see, e.g., legomsky (2010), 
which suggests an independent article i court, and family (2011). family (2011) and other works by the 
author explore many aspects of the adjudication and process issues in the immigration courts.

339

immigration adjudication: the missing rule of lawobligations and need for efficient resolution of claims. some of the ideas are culled from 
the excellent and voluminous recommendations and studies that have been prepared by the 
aba, uscirf, the administrative conference of the united states (acus), and others 
(aba commission on immigration 2010; cassidy and lynch 2016; benson and wheeler 
2012). other recommendations are based on my over 30 years of experience in this field 
and the opportunities to observe and reflect upon the operation of the removal systems. the 
lived territory of immigration adjudication is a very different place than a pure blueprint 
found in statutes and regulations would suggest.16

1.  the  dhs  should  establish  clear  enforcement  priorities  and 
cases  should  be  investigated  and  evaluated  before  commencing  a 
removal case 
as mentioned above, many of the cases in the immigration courts or within the ministerial 
removal systems are initiated by enforcement officers without review and prioritization by 
the trained attorneys representing the government. typically the mandatory cases are those 
arriving at the border. almost all other cases should require an individual assessment by an 
attorney. ice attorneys should not only review the charges presented by the enforcement 
officers but they should spend additional time on fact investigation. dhs should be given 
the resources to conduct fact investigation and to review the entire file of an individual. if 
the person appears to have extensive history and familial ties to the united states, the dhs 
should consider how the commencement of removal might disrupt a community business 
or harm the us family members. in some cases, if dhs offers freedom from incarceration 
and a period of a stay of removal, that option might be sufficient to create a settlement and 
a negotiated departure. 
in a recent case pending before the us supreme court, the federal criminal prosecutor 
did not intend the deportation of a man, jae lee, who had lived in the united states for 34 
years.17 integrating removal decisions with sentencing requests by federal prosecutors is 
already a possibility in some cases but is not widely used.18 ice does not have to put this 
man into removal after he has served his criminal sentence. ice attorneys tend to begin 
removal cases and decide during the hearing whether or not removal is appropriate. in 
cases where ice believes the individual has been convicted of an aggravated felony the 
agency has usually taken the position the case must move forward. while a man like jae, 
who held lawful permanent resident status, is entitled to a removal hearing and to defend 
against the grounds of removal, ultimately congress has eliminated almost every form of 
relief. congress cannot criminally prosecute a noncitizen without the same due process 
protections afforded a citizen, but because us law treats deportation as a civil sanction, 
someone like jae can lose everything he values. courts have repeatedly pointed out the 
16   see benson (2007) for a fuller elaboration of this concept.
17   lee v. united states, 825 f.3d. 311 (6th cir. 2016), cert. granted, 137 s. ct. 614 (2016). the sixth circuit 
court of appeals had ruled that jae lee could not set aside his plea agreement because it was not reasonable 
to assume that a person would risk trial with a longer period of incarceration where there was strong evidence 
of guilt rather than take a plea that shortened his sentence.
18    ina    238  authorizes  a  federal  sentencing  judge  in  a  case  involving  an  aggravated  felony  to  also 
issue an order of removal. there is little published data about the frequency of the us attorney generals 
implementation of this process. 

340

journal on migration and human securityharshness of deportation but have said it is up to congress to afford more opportunities 
to remain in the united states. until that day, and as immigration courts have no general 
equitable authority, it is incumbent on the ice attorney to consider the whole person and to 
make careful determinations about whether deportation should be sought.
this appeared to be the approach used in the final years of the obama administration. 
after  years  of  robust  deportations,  secretary  johnson  issued  a  memorandum  directing 
ice prioritize individuals with serious criminal convictions that posed a risk to national 
security or public safety and to prosecute recent border entrants (johnson 2014). the new 
administration has rescinded these directives and replaced it with a general policy of broad 
enforcement. dhs secretary john kelly preserves a focus on national security and public 
safety, but expands the priorities to all who have violated immigration rules (kelly 2017). 
the impact of the changed priorities remains to be seen. in the obama administration, the 
vast majority of people in removal were charged with immigration regulatory violations. 
fewer  than  five  percent  of  the  people  in  removal  last  year  were  charged  with  being 
removable based on a criminal conviction unrelated to a violation of immigration status. 
many people who come to the attention of dhs due to criminal arrests are ultimately 
treated only as status or entry violators. while many have committed misdemeanors in 
illegally entering the country, the lack of a significant number of cases involving criminal 
conduct other than immigration violations indicates that ice is not adequately evaluating 
the importance of a case and the real risks to public safety.
to use a model of selective referral to removal proceedings, dhs would need a culture 
change. it could model itself on other important federal agencies that protect us health 
and welfare. the department of labor is unable to bring every wage and hour violation. 
the environmental protection agency cannot pursue civil sanctions for every polluter. 
the department of the treasury cannot sanction every taxpayer and seize assets in every 
case. these agencies investigate, prioritize, and negotiate. if dhs were armed with more 
tools  than  simply  not  bringing  an  enforcement  action  or  closing  a  file  without  action, 
it  would  incentivize  cooperation  by  the  affected  individuals.  further,  the  opportunity 
to investigate and interview would allow the ice trial attorney to rely on the skills and 
adjudication  techniques  of  the  people  within  other  branches  of  dhs  to  make  security 
and risk assessments, such as whether the individual contributes to societys well-being 
or might be prone to an offense that threatens public safety at the present time, until an 
application for relief is initiated by the individual, there is little for the dhs officer or 
ice attorney to do but focus on removal, detention determinations, and execution of the 
removal orders. in asylum cases, the ice attorney plays an important role in testing the 
veracity of the evidence and the testimony of the applicant. but not every case needs to 
be resolved solely through contested litigation. there are many other mechanisms such as 
written submissions of evidence, in-person depositions, or conferences with the parties that 
might more quickly and effectively narrow issues and allow a case to be resolved. 
with an estimated 11 million undocumented people in the country and many living under 
existing final orders of removal, we need to give the dhs attorneys bargaining tools such 
as temporary work authorization, temporary status, conditional residency, and even a grant 
of permanent resident status for cases that might meet the legal immigration criteria, if 
not for technical reasons such as an entry without inspection, which make them unable to 
complete the adjustment of status or immigrant visa process.

341

immigration adjudication: the missing rule of lawgiven that a significant number of cases pending in the removal system resulted in and are 
likely to continue to result in case closure without a removal order, dhs should not waste 
the resources of doj courts or its appellate bodies. instead, ice should become part of the 
us registration and regularization force for cases deemed a low enforcement priority. ice 
should be able to exercise discretion prior to the removal adjudication.

2. fair adjudication for new arrivals requires adequate resources 

and greater accountability
prior to 1996, if a person arrived at a us port of entry such as an airport and the cbp 
(formerly immigration and naturalization service [ins]) inspector thought he or she had 
the wrong documents or false documents, he or she could put you into inadmissibility 
proceedings before an immigration judge. the individual might be detained, but most were 
given a temporary parole into the united states and then required to return for a further 
interview or for the hearing on their eligibility to enter. in 1996, congress gave cbp officers 
the choice to use expedited removal when a person lacked documents. for many years, the 
agency did not choose to use this tool to refuse admission along the mexican border. people 
would simply be refused entry. but dhs began to adopt a removal with consequences 
strategy. they expanded the use of expedited removal, which bars an individual for five 
years and subjects them to heightened criminal penalties if they chose to illegally reenter 
the country. the agency can and should return to its past practice of affording persons in 
this situation regular removal proceedings.
it is hard to say whether congress has always intended these outcomes. immigration law 
is complex and few have mastered all of the procedures or substantive rules. over time, as 
congress added more enforcement tools to expedite and to improve the efficiency of the 
removal system, it perhaps did not fully foresee the way in which the delegated authority 
would operate. when expedited removal was first created in 1996, it was rarely used and 
applied only to people arriving at airports who had destroyed their documents on flights. 
over time, cbp began to use expedited removal as a tool against people who had been 
apprehended multiple times trying to cross the border illegally. but in 2000 and again in 
2002, the bush administration used the statutory authority to expand expedited removal 
to within the interior for those who within the previous two years had entered illegally by 
sea, and to those apprehended with 100 miles of the international land border who could 
not prove presence of more than 14 days or entry with proper inspection. now the trump 
administration is considering whether to expand expedited removal into the interior of the 
united states for all who cannot prove presence of more than two years and who cannot 
prove proper inspection. expedited removal now accounts for more than 44 percent of 
removal orders (american immigration council 2017b).19 this process affords no judge, 
no hearing, no chance to defend, and no chance to delay. the only exception is for those 
who can establish a possible claim for protection due to a credible fear of persecution. 
it is difficult to evaluate the accuracy and fairness of expedited removal proceedings. first, 
it is even difficult to measure the use of the tool. the dhs formerly released the data about 

19   according  to american  immigration  council  (2017b):  in  fy  2013,  approximately  193,000  persons 
were deported from the united states through expedited removal. that represents 44 percent of all 438,000 
removals from the united states in 2013. 

342

journal on migration and human securitythe form and quantity of various removals. but the agency no longer reports expedited 
removals, reinstatement of removals, and administrative removals separately from other 
forms of removal. second, these forms of removal require little more than a dhs form 
and a supervisors signature. people subjected to the process may not understand that they 
have been subjected to a formal order of removal as opposed to being pushed back into 
mexico or told simply to return to the country of origin. people subjected to reinstatement 
of  removal  may  not  fully  understand  that  they  can  request  a  hearing  to  raise  a  fear  of 
persecution, but that they have no ability to present details or circumstances of their lives 
or to demonstrate the harm removal might create for them or their families. because this 
process includes no judges or transcripts in a central adjudicatory body, there is no public 
account of the removal orders and almost no review of the accuracy or fairness of the 
procedures used to establish the necessary predicate facts that subject the person to these 
truncated procedures. 
when considered solely as an efficient tool for rapid decision-making at the us port of entry, 
expedited removal may seem like a good balance of efficiency over accuracy. some people 
might be refused improperly but the alternative might be people who would use hearings 
and delay in the system to overwhelm the adjudications and to force the government to 
allow their physical presence within the united states. that rationale was part of the design 
when the system was limited to people who present themselves at a port of entry. however, 
the dhs expanded expedited removal and used it against people apprehended beyond the 
ports of entry. further, the use of expedited removal does not operate in isolation from other 
provisions of the law. handing an apprehended person a piece of paper labelled removal 
may be an insufficient warning of the severe consequences for subsequent reentry. reentry 
after an order of expedited removal can trigger criminal prosecution as a felony or the 
almost insurmountable lifetime bar to future legal admission. in theory, the statute contains 
a powerful tool to deter people from violating the rules and entering illegally after an order 
of removal, but in reality, the people who are subjected to these rules have received little 
information about the law, and virtually no warnings about the consequences of violating 
the law, or advice about alternatives. once someone enters illegally and remains for more 
than a year, she is trapped inside the united states. if she ever came forward to leave to try 
to correct her status, she would subject herself to the permanent bar.
the  cumulative  effect  of  these  procedures  has  been  to  create  a  vulnerable  and  trapped 
class of residents. there are likely millions of people who could be removed quickly and 
who have few ways to correct or regularize their status. ice does not formally report the 
number  of  outstanding  final  orders  but  estimates  are  that  an  estimated  900,000  people 
have  a  final  order  but  the  government  has  not  chosen  to  or  been  able  to  remove  them 
(vaughan 2016). some people appear at supervised release interviews living under a final 
but  unexecuted order  of  removal. under  existing procedures,  ice  need  not  provide  an 
opportunity for a new hearing even if the person has resided in the united states for most of 
his or her life. discretion given can be discretion withdrawn. the laws finality means that 
an individual may not be able to argue that a change in the interpretation of the immigration 
consequences of a conviction should now prevent her removal. congresss desire to create 
absolute categories of removable people and the elimination of many of the discretionary 
forms of relief have combined to create a rigid system where the persons lack of ties to 
any other nation, the citizenship of her children, and her long-term residence in the united 
states are irrelevant to the removal adjudication process.

343

immigration adjudication: the missing rule of lawperhaps congress has not given the border officers sufficient alternatives. if a person seeking 
protection appears at the us-mexico border and has no visa to seek admission, the system 
forces cbp to place her into some form of removal. there are many reasons congress 
and the agencies have chosen the path of detention and expedited removal. the primary 
argument is that the use of these tools will deter unlawful entrants. the evidence is mixed. 
the united states has never experienced the massive movements of people comparable 
to the millions seeking protection as they flee iraq, afghanistan, and syria, or the millions 
displaced or threatened within africa or asia. 
and, the current expedited removal status is actually not well suited when the united states 
receives large numbers of people with strong claims for protection. cbp takes the position 
that  if  someone  arrives  at  a  port  of  entry  or  a  border  crossing,  and  has  no  documents 
that authorize admission to the united states, it has no authority to allow them to seek 
asylum or similar protection. instead, cbp maintains that people in this system or those 
apprehended within 100 miles of the border, must be placed in expedited removal and 
detained. in a recent memorandum, the trump administration seemed to be considering 
whether to refuse even those who have a credible fear and to arrange for the use of video 
conferencing hearings from mexico (kelly 2017).20
the statutes and regulations have created a system where, once a statement of fear is made 
and recorded in a short q and a, cbp holds the individual for a credible fear assessment 
made by an asylum officer from the uscis that processes refugee and asylum claims. in 
some instances that means a face-to-face interview with an asylum officer and in others, 
it may mean a video teleconference. there is no right to counsel in the process but in 
some situations, cbp will allow an attorney to sit with the applicant and take notes. if the 
asylum officer finds the person has met the initial threshold, he or she will continue to be 
detained while a removal hearing to seek protection is scheduled. but if the assessment is 
a denial of the credible fear, then the applicant may seek a review of that determination by 
an immigration judge. there is no appeal from this decision, and only if the immigration 
judge finds a credible fear, will the individual proceed to a full hearing. 
at the time of its design, this system seemed like an appropriate way to weed out weak 
claims  with  little  likelihood  of  success  on  the  merits.  congress  created  the  expedited 
removal system to provide the federal government with tools to adapt to large numbers 
of arrivals, but for nearly 15 years dhs has expanded its use of expedited removal as a 
basic tool of enforcement. expedited removal is used both for the asylum seeker and the 
entrant refused admission at a border or between official ports of entry. during many of 
those years, the dhs would allow people to be released pending the asylum adjudication; 
some  were  released  with  ankle  monitors,  some  posted  bond,  and  some  on  their  own 
recognizance. but as the numbers of people seeking protection escalated in the summer 
of 2014 due to the growing violence and collapse of civil society protections within the 
northern triangle of central america, the system could not keep up with the volume of 
people seeking protection. 
at first, the us government responded both with an acknowledgement that the movement 
was a humanitarian crisis and by attempting to deter more asylum seekers. initially, cbp 

20   see generally, ina  235(b)(2); 8 u.s.c.  1225(b). 

344

journal on migration and human securityreleased adults traveling with small children, but continued removal proceedings against 
them  as  inadmissible  aliens.  but  as  the  numbers  grew,  the  dhs  began  to  build  more 
detention facilities (gilman 2016).

table  1.  us  border  patrol  southwest  family  unit  and 
unaccompanied  alien  children  apprehensions  fy  2013 
to fy 2016

unaccompanied children
family units
individuals
totals
source: cbp (2016a). 

fy 13
38,759
14,855
360,783
414,397

fy 14
68,541 
68,445
342,385
479,371

fy 15
39,970 
39,838
251,525
331,333

fy 16
59,692 
77,674
271,504
408,870

2011
1,394
1,565
974

2012
3,314
3,835
2,997

2013
5,990
8,068
6,747

2016
2017
2014
2015
2010
16,404 9,389
17,512 1,776
1,910
17,057 13,589 18,913 2,308
1,517
18,244 5,409
10,468 1,367
1,017
13,724 11,768 13,974 17,240 15,634 11,012 11,926 1,205
18,168 15,701 24,120 38,045 67,339 39,399 58,819 6,656

table  2.  us  border  patrol  southwest  unaccompanied 
child arrivals fy 2010 to fy 2017
southwest border apprehensions
country
el salvador
guatemala
honduras
mexico
total
source: cbp (2016b).21 
the obama administration sought to deter children and women with small children from 
making the dangerous trip and insisted that all adults traveling with children would be 
detained  pending  the  expedited  removal  process.  this  led  to  a  legal  challenge  to  the 
adequacy and fairness of the expedited removal process. 
the united states is not alone in struggling to adapt asylum adjudication procedures to 
large numbers of people.22 however, the combination of expedited removal, mandatory 
detention, obstacles to legal representation, and evidentiary restrictions abridges human 
rights. the fact that congress also precluded extensive judicial inquiry into the process 

21   totals added by author and last accessed in december 2016. the page contents have changed with the 
new administration.
22    while  asylum  applicants  at  the  border  have  dramatically  increased  since  2014,  the  totals  are  much 
smaller than the movements of millions of people fleeing iraq, syria, afghanistan, south sudan, eritrea, the 
central african republic, or many other refugee source nations. the unhcr (2016) estimates that more 
than 65 million people are forcibly displaced person. the united states needs to recommit to the protections 
enshrined in humanitarian treatise such as the refugee convention and not allow numbers alone to cause us 
to abandon these commitments. 

345

immigration adjudication: the missing rule of lawand  that  at  least  one  circuit  court  of appeals  agrees  with  those  limits,  creates  a  zone 
of adjudication without any of the key protections or process of an adjudication system. 
efficiency seems to be the paramount, singular goal.
in a comprehensive evaluation published in the summer of 2016, uscirf reported that 
the  expedited  removal  system  remains  flawed  and  expressed  concerns  about  both  the 
operation of the system and the increasing use of detention and video technology to conduct 
interviews by asylum officers (cassidy and lynch 2016).23 authorized by congress, in 
part, to observe and evaluate the expedited removal process, uscirf has proposed ways 
to increase transparency and ensure greater procedural protections. however, many of its 
recommendations have not been adopted. there is no other external regular assessment or 
review mechanism for this process. in short, expedited removal operates outside the rule 
of law. 
while courts have been reluctant to find that newcomers are entitled to a constitutional 
minimum of procedural protections, some new entrants are different in quality and nature 
than others. some have family here. some have no safe place to return to or are particularly 
vulnerable, such as young children. the obscurity of the expedited removal process hides 
its substantial problems. all removal procedures should generate an administrative record. 
yet, at present, expedited removal paperwork is very limited and completely controlled 
by  the  cbp  inspectors.  others  have  suggested  that  all  interviews  be  recorded.  even  if 
the united states valued speedy adjudication over additional process, it should allow a 
process for administrative review, submission of additional evidence, and review of the 
determination. if an individual was not seeking admission based on a claim for protection, 
this later review might be initiated while the applicant is abroad. at the current time, there 
is only an opaque process insulated from assessment and review.
furthermore, if the united states chooses to use an expedited process, it should adequately 
staff adjudication teams to interview, investigate, and determine who might need temporary 
admission and who might deserve permanent protection. congress should also give cbp 
and the asylum corps more options to respond to the protection needs of people at the 
border. for example, the united states could expand its use of temporary admission via 
parole. the united states could also expedite its adjudication process to help bona fide 
refugees present and complete their claims for protection.
if  speed  becomes  important  for  security  concerns  or  due  to  emergency  situations,  our 
system should have the flexibility to deploy more resources quickly and to use tools like 
priority dockets to move urgent cases first. at the current time, the underfunded courts are 
mostly disrupted when they try to move judges to needed areas and to move categories 
of cases to the front of the line. the repeated impact is to delay the adjudication of many 
other cases and to waste time and court resources in deciding which cases to prioritize. if 
the dhs attorneys are more engaged in the case-by-case decisions and if they are given 
greater options for outcomes, the system will both be more flexible and be better able to 
address emergent needs. 

23   the uscirf is the only entity that has been given access to carefully study the operations of the expedited 
removal system. the report by cassidy and lynch (2016) calls upon congress and the dhs to regularly 
investigate operations and to improve internal oversight.

346

journal on migration and human securityit is possible that generous adjudications and temporary admissions at our borders might 
encourage too many people to seek admission. but the current system screens out with a 
blunt removal and a bar for five years. the person who succeeds in entering illegally then 
becomes both a criminal and is barred potentially for life. in short, the pendulum has swung 
too far in one direction. 

3. the system must see the whole person not merely examine the 

mode of entry
for many, the legal process authorized is completely controlled by the original means of 
entry and has little or nothing to do with current ties to the united states. if a child is brought 
to the united states with her parents under the visa waiver program, he or she is bound 
by the waiver of her parents. even half a lifetime later, that child can be removed without 
any hearing. people previously ordered removed, after a few minutes of paperwork at an 
airport, could be subjected to reinstatement of removal even after 20 years of residence and 
the us citizenship of her children. long-term residents, with or without permission, almost 
never acquire any equitable authority to limit the power of the us government to remove 
them, especially if they are convicted of any criminal conduct.
a traditional hallmark of due process is to assess the property or liberty interest at risk and 
to ask if the government has a right to interfere with the individuals interest. while the 
supreme court has recognized since 1903 that even aliens are entitled to due process in 
deportation proceedings when the person is residing in the territory, it has unfortunately 
refused to use substantive due process to cut off the right of the federal government to 
deport. no matter the length of residence, no matter the hardship upon removal, courts have 
repeatedly concluded that the due process clause is insufficient to provide a shield from 
removal. instead we have relied on procedural surrogates to provide long-term residents 
with procedural protections such as hearings or burden shifting. 
congress  has  been  unwilling  to  allow  noncitizens  to  apply  for  waivers  of  deportation 
or  regularization  of  status  when  they  are  convicted of  certain  crimes  or  in  punishment 
for illegal entry after removal. while there are a few exceptions for victims of crime or 
domestic violence or for those who can demonstrate a probability of severe harm or torture, 
in the main, far too many long term-residents lack a remedy in immigration court.
the  system  needs  to  provide  more  options.  the  empirical  data  indicates  that  the  vast 
majority of people residing without status in the united states live in mixed households.24 
some family members are citizens, while some are permanent residents. moreover, the 
united  states  has  two  statutory  provisions  that  establish  significant  barriers  to  status 
through the legal immigration system. since 1996, the united states has punished people 
who overstayed a grant of status by more than one year with a 10-year bar if they depart. 
if the system removed this single provision, hundreds if not thousands of people could 
seek status through family and employer petitions as they did prior to 1996. it should also 
provide tools for dhs officials to grant permanent residence to people residing within the 
united states who cannot obtain status due to technical violations or an original failure 
24   according  to  warren  and  kerwin  (2017),  there  are  5.3  million  us  households  with  undocumented 
residents, and they are home to 5.7 million us-born children. 

347

immigration adjudication: the missing rule of lawto enter with a valid visa. dhs has a limited parole in place program, which allows the 
spouses and parents of us military on active duty to regularize status. if these individuals 
had to depart the united states and travel abroad to apply for a visa, their departure would 
trigger  a  permanent  or  10-year  bar  to  reentry.  some  view  discretion  as  rewriting  the 
immigration laws. if so, congress could always authorize parole more broadly or create 
more exceptions and interior waivers of the draconian departure bars. 

4. a statute of limitations is essential

one of the oldest constraints on civil law is the legislatures ability to limit litigation by 
forcing the parties to litigate before the claims go stale. statutes of limitation are, in part, 
intended  to  preserve  the  accuracy  of  evidence  and  the  ability  of  adjudicators  to  serve 
a truth-seeking function  time dims memories. the statutes also serve the interest of 
finality and certainty. if an old debt has never been pursued, for example, the debtor is free 
to deploy the assets elsewhere. if a title was transferred with a stain or lien, as the years go 
by, the new owner can be certain he or she possesses a clear title and the value of the asset 
is preserved or enhanced. 
in the us immigration system, this concept has been almost completely lost. in the early 
years of immigration law, the power to deport was limited to those who committed fraud at 
entry or committed an offense within the first few years after entry. there are still vestiges 
of  the  concept  in  some  portions  of  the  ina. a  single  offense  may  render  a  noncitizen 
deportable if committed within five years of entry but not afterward unless a second offense 
follows. but as the list of deportable offenses grew, few came with any temporal limit.
the us immigration system should afford a sense of finality and security to persons who 
have built strong equitable ties and lived in the united states for many years. if long-
term residents commit a crime, the criminal justice system has the tools to punish them. 
however, to deport a person after years of residence makes a mockery of the claim that 
removal is not punishment but a civil sanction.

5. a path to regularization

the vast majority of people in removal proceedings entered without a visa or overstayed 
a period of temporary admission. for some, the commencement of a removal proceeding 
might  unlock  a  door  to  status  through  cancellation  due  to  exceptional  and  extremely 
unusual  hardship  to  a  us  citizen  or  permanent  resident  relative. yet,  cancellation  for 
someone who has not held lawful permanent resident status is limited to 4,000 cases a year 
and for people who have resided in the united states for a minimum of 10 years.25 these 
numbers are usually used within the first 30 days of each year.

25   ina  240a(b); 8 u.s.c.  1229b provides for cancellation of removal for a person who can meet the 
strict criteria but the relief is only available in removal proceedings and is capped at 4,000 per year. there are 
other forms of cancellation for the lawful permanent resident who has seven years of physical presence and 
for victims of domestic violence. see generally ina  240a(a) and (c); 8 u.s.c.  1229b(a) and (c). but these 
opportunities for relief also are restricted by bars to eligibility for some forms of criminal behavior, even if 
the person is able to demonstrate rehabilitation.

348

journal on migration and human securityrather than placing people into the adversarial cauldron of a removal proceeding, dhs 
should have options for interviews and assessment. the agency could give individuals a 
deadline to apply for status and then pursue the usual background checks and evaluation of 
character and relationships as it already does in many cases. if the individual has committed 
serious crimes that have not been prosecuted or is a risk to national security, dhs can make 
a determination of whether the person should be removed. but the presumption should 
be that long-term residents would be vetted and integrated, not deported. congress could 
make this option a reality. the political conversation is a complex one but a path to status 
offers a huge incentive and vehicle for tax compliance, transparency, reporting, military 
service, family stability, and economic growth. the power to grant status may be the single 
best incentive for participating in the court process. conversely, the more difficult it is to 
qualify for status, the less effective it will be in promoting court adjudications. 

6. a right to counsel

processing times for non-detained cases can take years, given the massively backlogged 
court dockets. in cities like los angeles or new york, it is not uncommon for adjudication 
to require more than three years. however, more people are represented and ultimately 
successful in securing a remedy or relief from removal in these cities. the complexity of 
the adjudication process and the underlying law makes counsel a necessity. in a survey of 
ijs by acus, more than 80 percent reported that competent counsel improved the courts 
operations (benson and wheeler 2012).26 
the new york immigrant family unity project has been providing universal representation 
to all indigent new yorkers in regional detention for nearly four years. before the project 
began, fewer than 3 percent of the individuals secured any relief from removal. at present, 
approximately  30  percent  of  the  individuals  in  removal  proceedings  either  defeat  the 
governments charges or win discretionary relief.27 there are too many variables to predict 
similar results in every locality, especially where the substantive law can vary by federal 
circuit rulings. in new york city, a high percentage of the cases involve people who have 
applied for asylum affirmatively and are seeking review of their application, or were placed 
into removal due to a determination during a benefits application that their case presented 
a problem. the length of residence of the people, the existence of some waivers based on 
family relationships, the skills of the attorneys presenting asylum claims  these variables 
likely explain the differential in outcomes. 
but  the  evidence  that  counsel  makes  a  difference  is  dramatic.  transactional  records 
access clearinghouse (trac) data center at syracuse university has a standing freedom 
of information act (foia) request for the data and outcomes in juvenile cases. it appears 
that when a juvenile has an attorney in immigration court, he or she is 17 more times likely 
to secure a termination of the proceeding. these terminations are largely issued because 
the juvenile was granted a benefit such as special immigrant juvenile status or another visa 
or was able to secure asylum affirmatively at the uscis office. phrased another way, in 
26   see also shannon (2014) and thomas and benson (2016), which discusses the importance of counsel. 
27   testimony of jennifer friedman of bronx defenders to the new york city council, on behalf of the new 
york immigrant family unity project, dated march 22, 2017, on file with author. this project is funded by 
the city of new york and does not receive federal funding.

349

immigration adjudication: the missing rule of lawthe cases completed in fy 2015, a child was ordered removed in 34 percent of the cases 
without counsel and only 5 percent of the cases with representation.
unfortunately congress has not authorized paid counsel for children and recent litigation 
seeking government-appointed counsel was dismissed. a panel of the ninth circuit court 
of appeals ruled that congress required cases to begin with the immigration courts, to 
exhaust the administrative appeals process, and only then to avail themselves of the courts 
of appeal.28 the litigation seeking a class action declaring children were entitled to the 
appointment of counsel had begun in the federal district court. so congress, perhaps in an 
effort to preserve judicial efficiency, has instead, created a situation where thousands of 
children will have to hire counsel or hope for pro bono assistance or simply preserve the 
issue of a need for counsel in the individual immigration hearings. the result is particularly 
perverse  because  most  remedies  available for  these  juveniles are  found  in  fora  outside 
the court in applications for relief made before other bodies such as the asylum office or 
family courts. but children in removal proceedings have no knowledge of those external 
procedures and the immigration judges are powerless to grant relief directly.

table  3.  fy  2015:  outcomes  in  juvenile  cases  in  all 
immigration courts* 
removal  
fy 2015
order
6,695 
39% of the 
completed 
cases

prosecutorial 
discretion
269
15.7% 

term- 
ination
5,148
30%

other closure relief

4,364 
25.5%

90 
.5%

total of all 
juvenile cases: 
31,075 (pending 
as of mar. 2017: 
13,973)
17,102 completed 
unrepresented
9,819

represented
21,256

 5,905 
34% of the 
completed 
cases
791 
4.6%
more than 
8 times 
greater risk 
of removal 
order for 
unrepresented.

21
.01%

248
1.45%

2 
.01%

88 
.5%
44 
times

284 
1.6%

4,864 
28%
17 
times

367 
2.1%

3,997 
23.3%
10 times 
greater 
likelihood of 
success then 
unrepresented

*fifty-five  percent  of  the  juvenile  cases  initiated  in  fy  2015  were  completed  during  the  year.  not 
all  removal  orders  are  executed.  juveniles  may  receive  an  administrative  closure  or  after  an  order 
of  removal  or  deferred  departure.  political  asylum  is  the  most  common  form  of  relief  granted 
in  these  cases.  termination  usually  occurs  with  ice  consent  based  on  relief  pending  at  uscis. 
source: trac (2017), using the data from 2015.

28   j.e.f.m. v. lynch, 837 f.3d 1026 (9th cir. 2016). a petition for en banc review is pending as of march 
2017.

350

journal on migration and human securitylegal counsel increases rates of relief from removal. in addition, there is strong evidence 
that providing counsel would save time and money for the federal government (montgomery 
2014).29 counsel would not be able to secure relief for every person but they can advise the 
individual about his options and in many cases this may result in fewer nights in detention 
and shortened proceedings. as mentioned, if the ice trial counsel adopted a culture of 
negotiation, it is likely that the delays inherent in the system now would be reduced. at 
present, more than one-half of all the continuances granted by ijs are issued to allow the 
individual time to try to secure counsel (benson and wheeler 2012).

7.  reconsider  the  growing  criminalization  of  immigration 

violations
despite the fact that the majority of removal orders are issued in an expedited or purely 
ministerial fashion, the long-term consequences for the individuals who are subject to these 
orders can be quite extreme. people who reenter the united states after an order of removal 
are subject to criminal prosecution for a felony. immigration violations are primarily civil 
law violations. yet, in the past 10 years, the federal government has chosen to use criminal 
sanctions against those who illegally reenter. in fact, it is the single largest category of 
criminal prosecution in the entire federal system and the fastest growing category of any 
crime.  in  fy  2016,  the  us  federal  courts  entertained  prosecutions  for  illegal  entry  (a 
misdemeanor) and criminal reentry (a potential felony) in nearly 69,000 cases (us district 
courts 2016).30 the next closest category of federal prosecutions was for drug crimes, with 
fewer than 20,000 cases. 
a truncated, summary removal order issued by a cbp inspector one day can result in a later 
felony conviction if the individual tries to reenter the united states the next day. further, 
these criminal prosecutions can carry significant sentences. the federal public defenders 
have developed an entire body of law collaterally attacking the legitimacy of the initial 
expedited removal to help diminish or eliminate the criminal sanction that can follow from 
that order. the defenders have sought to show that the expedited removal process violates 
basic tenets of procedural due process as the system can be prone to errors of fact and of 
application of law. a panel of the ninth circuit recently ruled that although the system of 
expedited removal may be swift, it does not violate the due process rights of recent unlawful 
entrants because congress may largely define the scope of process and the constitution, 
while guaranteeing due process of law to all people may not attach to recent entrants.31

8. end detention as part of the pre-trial removal process

the  growth  of  civil  detention  in  immigration  cases  is  exponential  and  expensive.  the 
funds  used  to  detain  and  control  nearly  500,000  people  annually  could  be  better  spent 

29   montgomery (2014) concludes that counsel reduces delays and detention and would be cost effective and 
might produce savings.
30   one analysis of the data states that as of the end of fy 2016, 52 percent of all criminal cases in the federal 
district court are related to immigration (trac 2016). 
31   see united states v peralta-sanchez, 847 f3d 1124 (9th cir. 2017), on collaterally attacking an order of 
removal in a subsequent criminal prosecution. petition for en banc review pending.

351

immigration adjudication: the missing rule of lawin  providing  resources  to  the  adjudicators.  there  is  no  true  justification  for  wholesale 
detention  of  noncitizens.  congress  has  traditionally  justified  detention  as  necessary  to 
ensure attendance at removal hearings or to protect public safety. for those people who are 
in detention related to a conviction in the criminal justice system, the dhs could prioritize 
completing the removal process.32 if dhs relied more heavily on proven and promising 
alternative to detention programs, some of the worst aspects of the removal system would 
be eliminated.

conclusion  a dark territory 
immigration law operates in the darkness beyond the reach of due process protections, 
accuracy, fairness, and transparency. record numbers of immigrants live in the united 
states, but far too often they reside in a legal territory which the light does not reach. this 
essay has highlighted some of the characteristics of the us removal system. it outlines 
this systems lack of substantive protections and its overreliance on hidden and expedited 
processes. it argues that this system needs to be redesigned to reflect the rule of law. the 
system needs to be exposed to the light of day.

