creating cohesive, coherent 
immigration policy1

pia m. orrenius 
federal reserve bank of dallas and institute of labor economics

madeline zavodny 
agnes scott college and institute of labor economics

executive summary
us immigration policy has serious limitations, particularly when viewed 
from  an  economic  perspective.  some  shortcomings  arise  from  faulty 
initial design, others from the inability of the system to adapt to changing 
circumstances. in either case, a reluctance to confront politically difficult 
decisions  is  often  a  contributing  factor  to  the  failure  to  craft  laws  that 
can stand the test of time. we argue that, as a result, some key aspects 
of  us  immigration  policy  are  incoherent  and  mutually  contradictory   
new policies are often inconsistent with past policies and undermine their 
goals. inconsistency makes policies less effective because participants in 
the immigration system realize that lawmakers face powerful incentives 
to  revise  policies  at  a  later  date.  us  policies  regarding  unauthorized 
immigration, temporary visas, and humanitarian migrants offer examples 
of incoherence and inconsistency. this article explores key features of an 
integrated, coherent immigration policy from an economic perspective and 
how policymakers could better attempt to achieve policy consistency across 
laws and over time.

i. introduction
although there is widespread consensus that us immigration policy is broken, there is 
little agreement on how it is broken. one view, for example, is that the united states is too 
tolerant of unauthorized immigration  it does not enforce its borders effectively or deport 
enough unauthorized immigrants. an opposing view is that the country should recognize 
unauthorized  immigrants  contributions  by  enacting  a  widespread  legalization  program 
that includes a pathway to us citizenship. and while few people argue against enforcing 
the countrys borders, researchers point to diminishing marginal returns to additional us 
border enforcement (batalova and terrazas 2012). some economists even argue that the 
economic gains from having a flexible, low-cost unauthorized workforce may outweigh 
the costs associated with large-scale unauthorized immigration and hence, changing the 
current system would leave the country worse off (hanson 2007).

1   the views expressed here are those of the authors and do not reflect those of the federal reserve bank of 
dallas or the federal reserve system.

 2017 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 5 number 1 (2017): 180-193disagreements about us immigration policy extend to legal immigration as well. points 
of contention include how many temporary foreign workers should be admitted and their 
required skill set, as well as the relative importance of skills and education versus family 
ties in awarding permanent resident visas. whether to admit refugees from predominately 
muslim countries emerged as another area of disagreement during the 2016 presidential 
campaign, culminating in two 2017 executive orders attempting to ban most migrants from 
several countries and causing widespread protests in reaction.
this article focuses on a more fundamental way in which us immigration policy is broken: 
taken as a whole, it is not a cohesive, coherent set of laws and regulations. in some cases, 
individual policies and practices actually undermine each other. the 1965 amendments 
to the immigration and naturalization act (ina), also called the hart-celler act, set up a 
system of issuing permanent resident visas based primarily on family ties or employment. 
most changes to us immigration policy since then have involved tinkering at the margins 
of this system, not enacting large-scale reforms that would overhaul it entirely. decades 
of  tinkering have resulted in an immigration policy akin to johnny  cashs  psychobilly 
cadillac: the parts dont fit together quite right, and something is definitely wrong.
a key failure of us immigration policy is that it is not forward looking or flexible. it too 
often fails to look ahead and consider the ramifications of current laws and regulations. 
addressing these future consequences may be politically challenging, giving policymakers 
an incentive to put off action, but the failure to enact coherent, consistent policies has resulted 
in large-scale unauthorized immigration, long backlogs for permanent resident visas, and 
widespread dissatisfaction with the nations immigration policy. this dissatisfaction can 
lead to nativist backlashes, as has been the case in the united states since the late 2000s, 
in europe as a result of the recent refugee influx, and in the united kingdom leading up to 
the brexit vote. the backlashes can result in abrupt overcorrections by policymakers, as 
demonstrated in both the united states and europe. ultimately, this dissatisfaction reduces 
public support for admitting immigrants and for helping them once they are in the country.
this article explores three major areas in which us immigration policy has been neither 
cohesive  nor  coherent.  first,  us  policies  towards  unauthorized  immigrants  have  been 
inconsistent  in  ways  that  have  fueled  additional  unauthorized  immigration  or  created 
perverse incentives to remain unauthorized. second, us temporary visa programs are not 
aligned with permanent visa programs, creating additional inconsistencies. finally, some 
us programs for humanitarian migrants also suffer from incoherence and inconsistency. 
this last problem is not unique to the united states. as this article discusses, the european 
response to humanitarian migrants has also been disjointed and confused. europes recent 
experience may offer lessons for us policymakers in what not to do, and vice versa. the 
article then explores the key elements of a cohesive, coherent immigration policy that is 
internally and temporally consistent. policy inconsistency is far from the only problem 
with the current immigration system, but it is a topic that has received less attention than 
other, more concrete subjects, such as the number and types of visas available and how to 
address unauthorized immigration.
creating a cohesive, coherent immigration policy requires understanding the goals of an 
effective immigration system. for the united states, immigration policy goals currently  
and historically  include enabling families to reunify, encouraging productive workers to 

181

creating cohesive, coherent immigration policyimmigrate, and meeting humanitarian obligations. we agree that these are important goals, 
although as economists we would probably put more emphasis on the second one than 
many others might. immigration policy can serve as a tool to advance national interests in 
domestic or foreign spheres, such as admitting investors with deep pockets or citizens of 
regimes that the us government opposes. difficulties arise when these interests conflict. 
this is particularly likely to happen when the total number of immigrants admitted is capped, 
so more immigrants in one group means fewer in another. as this article argues, cohesive, 
coherent policies are likely to lead to more public support for immigration. this, in turn, 
would allow policymakers to ease limits on the total number of immigrants admitted and 
give lawmakers greater freedom to use immigration policy to pursue the nations economic 
and political interests.

ii. unauthorized immigration
more than 11 million unauthorized immigrants were living in the united states in 2014 
(passel and cohn 2016). although large, this is actually below the populations peak of over 
12 million just before the start of the great recession in 2007. perhaps one of the biggest 
takeaways from the last few decades of us immigration policy is that a severe economic 
downturn may be the fastest and most effective way to reverse unauthorized immigration. 
but of course no one would recommend the country endure a recession in order to reduce 
unauthorized immigration, so what measures do policymakers actually take?
policymakers typically enact tougher border enforcement measures in order to reduce the 
number of people entering the country illicitly and tougher interior enforcement measures in 
order to reduce the number of people living in the country illegally. interior enforcement can 
involve involuntary removals  deportations  or making life so difficult for unauthorized 
immigrants that they choose to leave on their own, so-called self-deportations.
from the 1960s until the early 2000s, the united states emphasized border enforcement 
while  largely  neglecting  interior  enforcement. this  was  policy  inconsistency:  potential 
unauthorized immigrants outside the country faced far more barriers than unauthorized 
immigrants already in the country. interior enforcement in the hart-celler era only began 
in earnest after 9/11, when the federal government enacted a number of measures aimed at 
bolstering national security that also made life more difficult for unauthorized immigrants 
(orrenius and zavodny 2009).2 before that, policy seemed almost darwinian  border 
enforcement  kept  out  the  poorest,  least-educated  immigrants  since  they  were  the  ones 
who could not afford to hire a smuggler or manage to get a tourist or temporary visa they 
could later overstay. once someone made it in, they could largely live and work in the 
united states without fear of being deported, so many stayed. lax interior enforcement 
undermined  strict  border  enforcement.  another  manifestation  of  policy  inconsistency: 
border enforcement tended to be counter-cyclical with regard to demand for unauthorized 
workers during this period, with authorities relaxing enforcement when sectors that use 
large  numbers  of  unauthorized  immigrant  workers  expanded  (hanson  and  spilimbergo 
2001).

2   a  notable  exception  is  operation  wetback  during  the  1950s,  which  involved  both  intensified  border 
enforcement and the mass deportation of mexican immigrants (ngai 2004). 

182

journal on migration and human securitythe united states kicked off another round of inconsistent policy making when it granted 
legal status to 2.7 million unauthorized immigrants as part of the 1986 immigration reform 
and control act (irca). many of the newly legalized immigrants set down roots in the 
united states and wanted family members and friends to join them. legal immigration from 
mexico rose after irca, particularly as immigrants became naturalized us citizens able 
to sponsor their spouses, parents, and unmarried dependent children for legal permanent 
resident visas  green cards  categories of immediate relatives that are not subject to 
numerical limits (figure 1).

figure 1. family-sponsored immigration from mexico and 
apprehensions along us-mexico border, 1978-2014

source: data are from the us department of homeland security (or immigration and naturalization services) 
and are for fiscal years.3
however, not enough green cards were available to meet rising demand in numerically 
limited categories. by 1992, mexican immigrants faced a backlog in every numerically 
limited  category  of  family  sponsored  visas.  long  wait  times  to  enter  legally  led  to  a 
resurgence  of  illegal  entries. as  figure  1  shows,  migrant  apprehensions  along  the  us-
mexico  border  soon  resumed  their  pre-irca  pace.  the  1994-95  mexican  peso  crisis 
further fueled unauthorized immigration and added to the demand for visas. policymakers 
could not have anticipated the mexican economys collapse, but they could and should 
have anticipated that demand for visas would rise after irca. the failure to couple the 
legalization program with an increase in visas undermined ircas goals by contributing to 
3   data taken from the us department of homeland security (dhs), enforcement case tracking system 
(enforce)  and  the  performance  analysis  system  (pas).  for  years  prior  to  2005,  data  are  from  the 
statistical yearbook of the immigration and naturalization service (various years). for 2005-2010, data are 
from sapp (2011).  fy 2011-2014 data from dhs (2014), table 35. fy 2015 data from dhs (2015).

183

creating cohesive, coherent immigration policyunprecedented levels of unauthorized immigration. tougher border enforcement combined 
with lax interior enforcement also led to increased length of stay in the united states among 
unauthorized immigrants (angelucci 2012). what had largely been a pool of male workers 
who circulated back and forth between mexico and the united states became a base of 
families settled in the united states (massey and riosmena 2010).
ircas failure to reduce unauthorized immigration contributed to the enactment of the 
illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act (iirira) in 1996. among 
other provisions, iirira imposed three- and 10-year reentry bars for most people who had 
been in the united states illegally. this gave unauthorized immigrants additional incentive 
to  remain  in  the  united  states  illegally rather  than  return  home  to  legalize their  status 
since doing so would have triggered the reentry bar. given that the new rules discouraged 
immigrants who were clearly eligible for green cards from getting them, policymakers 
quickly backtracked and twice extended or created provisions that allowed unauthorized 
immigrants to file to adjust status without leaving the country so they could avoid triggering 
the reentry bar.4 the iirira is a prime illustration of an overcorrection by policymakers 
reacting to consequences that could have been foreseen and addressed when irca was 
crafted. 
the  growth  in  the  unauthorized  immigrant  population  has  been  unpopular  with  many 
americans. although many businesses and consumers benefit from having a large, low-
wage labor force, there are concerns about possible adverse effects on competing american 
workers, the fiscal costs of unauthorized immigrants and their children, a breakdown of 
the rule of law, and the cultural impact of having a sizeable predominately non-english-
speaking  immigrant  population.  one  of  the  more  subtle  downsides  of  having  a  large 
number  of  unauthorized  immigrants  is  that  the  us  public  and  media  have  focused  on 
this group, which only comprises about one-quarter of all foreign-born living there. as a 
result, policymakers often focus on this group as well instead of addressing broader issues, 
including those regarding legal immigration such as temporary and permanent visas.

iii. temporary and permanent visas
the  disconnect  between  the  temporary  and  permanent  visa  systems  is  another  major 
example of incoherent, inconsistent us immigration policy. a well-designed immigration 
system that includes both temporary and permanent employment-based visas should allow 
workers to readily adjust to permanent residence status when their temporary visa expires 
if their employer is willing to sponsor them. current policy prevents experienced foreign 
workers whom employers want to keep from staying and instead obliges firms to bring 
in new, inexperienced temporary workers because of a mismatch between the number of 
permanent employment-based green cards and the number of temporary work visas. the 

4   the 245(i) amendment to ina allowed unauthorized immigrants with approved green cards to adjust status 
without leaving the united states and becoming subject to the reentry bar. the 245(i) provision was in effect 
for eligible immigrants between 1994 and 1998 and for a four-month period in 2001. today, only immigrants 
whose absence would cause extreme hardship to a us citizen may receive a waiver that allows them to adjust 
status under 245(i).  the obama administration also created a procedure to allow certain persons found to be 
statutorily eligible for an immigrant visa to apply for a waiver of the unlawful presence reentry bars, prior to 
leaving the united states for their consular interviews.  

184

journal on migration and human securityimmigration act of 1990 allocated 140,000 green cards annually across five employment-
based categories and 65,000 h-1b temporary visas for skilled foreign workers. the former 
number has remained fixed since then while the number of h-1b visas issued has more 
than tripled.5 the fact that accompanying dependents are counted towards the green card 
cap but not the h-1b cap further exacerbates the imbalance.
the most obvious result of the imbalance is long wait times for temporary foreign workers 
trying to adjust to permanent residence. table 1 shows the average wait time in five-year 
intervals for eb-3 green cards for skilled workers and professionals.6 during fiscal years 
2012-16, immigrants receiving eb-3 green cards had applied for them an average of 36 
months prior. the wait is even longer for immigrants from major source countries (china, 
india, and the philippines) because of country caps.7 some immigrants who want to adjust 
to permanent resident status go to extraordinary lengths to do so, such as marrying a us 
citizen in order to get a green card.

china
9
24
16
74
62

india
4
28
19
89
127

philippines
26
1
16
61
75

rest of world 
0
0
12
61
36

table 1. average wait time in months of third preference 
employment-based immigrants
time period
1992-1996
1997-2001
2002-2006
2007-2011
2012-2016
source: us department of states visa bulletin. data are averages by fiscal year.
less obvious results of the imbalance include discouraging skilled workers from remaining 
in the united states while waiting for a green card and encouraging high-tech companies 
that rely on the h-1b program to hire large numbers of workers to instead open up facilities 
in  source  countries  or  in  countries  with  less-restrictive  immigration  policies,  such  as 
canada. the shortage of visas down the line also dissuades some highly skilled people 
from accepting a temporary foreign worker visa or even a student visa.8
5   the american  competitiveness  in  the  21st  century act  expanded  the  number  of  h-1b  visas  without 
increasing the number of employment-based green cards. the act expanded the h-1b program in four main 
ways: it increased the number of h-1b visas available from 65,000 to up to 195,000 for three fiscal years; it 
exempted employees of higher educational institutions and nonprofit and government research organizations 
from the cap; it exempted 20,000 recipients of a us masters degree or higher from the cap; and it exempted 
h-1b renewals from counting towards the cap.
6   eb-3 is the largest category of employment-based green cards, accounting for almost 60,000 visas in a 
typical year, or about 40 percent of the employment-based total.
7   the ina limits the number of preference-based green cards issued to any single country to 7 percent of 
the total each fiscal year. hence, countries as large as china, with 1.4 billion people, can receive at most the 
same number of such green cards  25,620  as countries as small as luxembourg, with half a million 
inhabitants.
8   shih (2016) shows that the reduction in the h-1b cap in 2004 reduced enrollment of international students 
at  us  colleges  and  universities  by  about  10  percent.  kato  and  sparber  (2013)  show  that  it  particularly 
discouraged high-ability foreign students from attending college in the united states.

185

creating cohesive, coherent immigration policya  final  example  of  disjointed  policy  related  to  temporary  and  permanent  employment-
based visas is the inconsistent conditions for receiving the two types of visas. in order to 
hire a worker with an h-1b visa, most employers must simply attest that they will pay that 
worker at least as much as similar workers or the prevailing wage in the occupation and 
area, and that the employment conditions of similar workers will not be adversely affected.9 
in order to sponsor a worker for an eb-2 or eb-3 visa, employers must demonstrate that 
they have made a good-faith effort to recruit a us worker and that no qualified us worker 
is willing and able to do the job at a comparable wage. in effect, employers must meet a 
higher legal standard to sponsor a worker for a permanent visa than for a temporary one. 
moreover, an employer who hires a worker on an h-1b visa is far from guaranteed that the 
worker can eventually qualify for a green card. having the same legal threshold for both 
visas as well as more permanent visas allotted to temporary workers who want to remain 
would help lead to a more coherent, consistent immigration system.

iv. humanitarian migrants
how countries should address humanitarian migrant streams has become a pressing issue 
as millions of syrians have fled their country, hundreds of thousands of africans have 
crossed the mediterranean into europe, and tens of thousands of unaccompanied minors 
have streamed north from central america during the last few years. the united states  
and many european union countries  has often reacted in incoherent, inconsistent ways 
to these and other streams of humanitarian migrants.
the united states has an annual quota on refugee admissions but not on asylum seekers. 
the refugee quota is set by the president in consultation with congress and was 70,000 
per year in recent years but was raised to 85,000 in fiscal year 2016 and to 110,000 in 
fiscal year 2017 in response to ongoing humanitarian crises. president trump reduced it 
to 50,000 within a week of taking office and implemented a 120-day moratorium on all 
refugee admissions. the quota is divided across major regions of origin, including near 
east/south asia, africa, east asia, europe/central asia, and latin america/caribbean. 
this  fixed  regional  quota  system  means  that  an  unexpected  humanitarian  crisis  in  one 
country reduces the likelihood that other humanitarian migrants from the same region will 
receive refuge in the united states. it also gives humanitarian migrants an incentive to try 
to enter the united states illicitly in order to apply for asylum.
refugees apply for admission from outside of the country, whereas asylum seekers are 
already  in  the  country  or  at  the  border  when  they  ask  for  protection.  one  reason  this 
distinction is important is that us immigration policy does not cap the number of people 

9   h-1b dependent employers  firms with h-1b workers comprising 15 percent or more of their total 
workforce  must also attest that they will not displace any similarly employed us worker for 90 days and 
that they took good faith steps to recruit us workers and first offered the job to any equally or better qualified 
us worker. there are exemptions if the h-1b worker earns at least $60,000 or has a masters degree or higher.

186

journal on migration and human securitywho can be granted asylum.10 as a result, humanitarian migrants may undertake dangerous 
journeys to the united states in hopes of receiving asylum once they reach its borders 
instead of waiting abroad to be admitted as a refugee.
the  central american  minors  (cam)  program  is  an  example  of  how  well-intentioned 
policies regarding humanitarian migrants can nevertheless be incoherent. created in 2014, 
the program allows certain legally present parents in the united states (qualifying parents) 
to initiate an application for refugee status or parole for their qualifying minor children 
in el salvador, guatemala, or honduras, as well as for certain other family members.11 
the goal was to reduce the number of children undertaking perilous journeys north  an 
important goal. but children can qualify for the program only if they have a parent lawfully 
present in the united states. this dramatically limits the programs applicability since many 
of the children traveling north either do not have a parent there or are trying to reunite with 
a parent who lacks legal status. in addition, the program only grants lawful status in the 
united states for two years, not permanent residence; this short timeframe essentially kicks 
the can down the road. participation in the program has been modest so far, although it is 
growing. as of february 2017, the program had approved around 11,000 applications, but 
fewer than 2,400 approved children had actually entered the united states. this compares 
with more than 40,000 unaccompanied children apprehended along the us-mexico border 
in fiscal year 2015 and almost 60,000 in fiscal year 2016.12
the limited timeframe of the residence permits issued under the cam program illustrates a 
credibility problem in several us programs for humanitarian migrants. despite announcing 
temporary protective measures, policymakers are typically very reluctant to enforce the 
limited timeframe. temporary protected status (tps) is a case in point (bergeron 2014). 
since  1990,  the  united  states  has  tended  to  grant  tps  to  unauthorized  or  temporary 
migrants already present in the country when a natural disaster or other crisis occurs in 
their home country. tps is valid for six to 18 months, but policymakers can opt to extend 
it. such extensions have become commonplace  honduran and nicaraguan beneficiaries 
have had tps since early 1999, and salvadorans since 2001. the temporary aspect of tps 
seems to have fallen by the wayside. and after more than 15 years in the united states, 
it seems unlikely many of those beneficiaries would leave if their protected status was 
not renewed yet again. further, their continued lawful presence in the united states may 
have led to additional unauthorized immigration as they are joined by family members 
and  may  have  sowed  confusion  abroad  about  perceived  amnesties.  president  obamas 
executive  actions  that  aimed  to  grant  deferred  deportation  to  qualifying  unauthorized 
immigrants  the deferred action for childhood arrivals (daca) program in 2012 and 

10   the number of people who receive asylum has averaged around 25,000 per year in recent years. one 
aspect of time-inconsistent immigration policy with respect to humanitarian migrants is no longer in place: 
until 2005, the number of successful asylum seekers who could adjust to legal permanent resident status 
after one year of us residence was capped at 10,000 per year, while the number of people who could be 
granted asylum was unlimited. removing the cap on permanent resident visas was a step toward coherent, 
time-consistent policy.
11   in november 2016, this program was expanded to allow for the admission of the qualifying us parents 
children who are married and/or over age 21, as well as the qualifying childs biological parent and his or her 
caregiver in certain circumstances.
12   statistics on cam program participants are from robles and semple (2017); statistics on apprehensions 
of unaccompanied children are from us customs and border protection (2016). 

187

creating cohesive, coherent immigration policythe deferred action for parents of americans program in 2014, the latter of which has been 
permanently enjoined  may have added to this confusion. daca is also another example 
of a temporary program that has already been renewed once.
the  united  states  is  not  the  only  country  with  difficulty  creating  coherent,  temporally 
consistent policies regarding humanitarian migrants. in recent years, european countries 
have  responded  to  the  inflow  of  humanitarian  migrants  from  syria,  afghanistan,  and 
other  non-eu  countries  in  a  chaotic,  disjointed  manner.  under  the  dublin  regulation, 
eu members had a key common policy regarding asylum seekers: their claims would be 
processed in the first eu country they reached. this cooperation was intended to eliminate 
asylum seekers incentive to travel to northern european countries with friendlier policies, 
stronger economies, and more generous welfare benefits. a combination of massive inflows 
in recent years, continued economic weakness in major countries of entry (greece, italy, 
and spain), lack of cost-sharing, and unwillingness to more evenly allocate humanitarian 
migrants across countries all contributed to a breakdown of that cooperation.
some  countries    most  notably  germany  and  sweden    threw  open  their  doors  to 
humanitarian migrants and then faced public backlash as hundreds of thousands of migrants 
rushed in. swedish policymakers responded to that backlash by largely slamming the door 
shut, whereas german policymakers have largely continued to welcome asylum seekers 
but pressured neighboring countries to stem the flow while redistributing asylum seekers 
within the countrys own borders. meanwhile, some other eu member states made few, if 
any, changes to their policies or tightened their immigration policies. the united kingdoms 
brexit vote was in part a backlash against eu migration as well as the european unions 
handling of the refugee crisis. the united kingdom is a popular migrant destination since 
it has both a relatively strong economy and the benefit of the english language, which 
many migrants already speak and understand. the brexit vote dictated that the united 
kingdom exit the european union and recover control over its borders.
there  are  several  reasons  why  eu  coordination  on  immigration  policy  is  inherently 
unstable and policies are inconsistent (orrenius and zavodny 2016). first, immigration-
related costs tend to be concentrated among particular member states. nations along the eu 
periphery face high costs of enforcing their borders and processing humanitarian migrants, 
and they have strong incentives to simply let migrants continue northward. the fact that 
there is little internal border enforcement under the schengen agreement enables this; it 
also makes the european union a more attractive destination to migrants. there is also 
relatively little external border enforcement, although it bears noting that both internal and 
external enforcement have increased in the wake of the recent refugee influx.
second,  the  eu  countries  differ  markedly  in  their  attractiveness  to  migrants  and  their 
capacity or willingness to absorb them. migrants, both those already in the european union 
and those arriving from the rest of the world, strongly prefer countries with large migrant 
networks,  growing  economies,  and  generous  social  safety  nets.  myriad  cross-country 
differences make it more difficult for member states to agree on immigration policies or on 
sufficient cost-sharing. these issues point to several potential lessons for us policymakers, 
as discussed below.

188

journal on migration and human securityv.  what  would  cohesive,  coherent  immigration  policy 
encompass?
immigration  policymakers  who  aim  to  create  a  cohesive,  coherent  system  should  keep 
several key factors in mind. first is the interconnected nature of many migrant streams. 
policymakers should consider the likely effects of an immigration policy on future flows. 
if a policy will induce sizable inflows, as the 1986 legalization program did in the united 
states, policymakers should ensure that legal channels can accommodate those inflows. if 
they cannot, unauthorized immigration will rise.
policymakers  aiming  to  stem  unauthorized  immigration  should  recognize  that  tougher 
border enforcement can help keep unauthorized immigration in check but is costly and 
has far-reaching unintended consequences. at this point in the united states, where the 
southwest border is very heavily enforced, tougher interior enforcement measures would 
be more effective than building a wall or other forms of additional border enforcement. 
interior enforcement can better address the root cause for many migration streams, namely 
employment  opportunities.  requiring  all  employers  to  use  e-verify  for  new  hires,  for 
example, would help remove the jobs magnet that attracts many unauthorized immigrants.13 
tightening interior enforcement would also be cohesive with maintaining current levels of 
border enforcement, reinforcing existing policies instead of undermining them. creating 
more legal channels for less-educated immigrants to enter the country would also help 
reduce unauthorized immigration.
policymakers also need to decide how to best deal with unauthorized immigrants already 
present in the country. decades of inconsistent policies have created a situation in which 
the united states has no easy choices. it can crack down on unauthorized immigrants who 
have been living and working in the united states, either by deporting them or by making 
things so bad that they leave. either one would be bad not only for those unauthorized 
immigrants but also for any us citizen children they have (warren and kerwin 2017). 
in addition, it would create sizable disruptions in some labor and product markets in the 
short to medium run. alternatively, the united states can enact a legalization program and 
couple it with measures aimed at keeping future unauthorized immigration at a minimum. 
a major concern here is that a legalization program may result in yet more illegal inflows 
or visa overstays in hopes of another amnesty, undermining the goal of less unauthorized 
immigration. the bush and obama administrations made a third choice: they turned a 
blind eye toward most unauthorized immigrants once they were established in the country. 
while perhaps understandable in the short run, this policy inconsistency has only worsened 
the problem in the long run.
second, policymakers need to build more flexibility into the immigration system. rigid 
caps  for  permanent  residents  and  some  categories  of  temporary  foreign  workers  have 
resulted in tremendous backlogs and inefficient lotteries and have discouraged countless 
potential would-be immigrants from applying or staying in the united states; they may even 
encourage some companies to open or expand operations overseas instead of domestically. 
the cap on refugees means humanitarian migrants may have to choose between living 
13   a national e-verify mandate would likely be very detrimental to unauthorized immigrant workers and 
their families. it therefore should be implemented as part of broader reforms that grant some form of legal 
status to unauthorized immigrant workers who have been living in the united states for a long time.

189

creating cohesive, coherent immigration policyin deplorable conditions in a third country and risking a dangerous journey to the united 
states in order to apply for asylum. quotas should rise and fall in response to changes in 
origin-country economic, political, and social conditions and, in the case of employment-
based visas, to changes in us economic conditions. 
such flexibility could be built in via automatic adjustment mechanisms, such as a formula 
that  increases  the  number  of  temporary  and  permanent  employment-based  visas  when 
the unemployment rate is low and falling and gdp growth is rising and reduces it when 
the  opposite  occurs.  if  a  formula  is  too  rigid  for  policymakers,  they  could  instead  use 
market-based mechanisms to allocate employment visas, such as auctioning off permits 
to hire temporary foreign workers (orrenius and zavodny 2010). automatically creating 
more  family-based  visas  for  migrants  from  a  given  country  in  response  to  larger  legal 
inflows from that country might also make sense, although a simpler solution is to just 
remove the country cap on permanent visas. alternatively, the united states could create 
an independent commission, like the united kingdoms migrant advisory committee, that 
regularly advises on the number of visas or even sets quotas.
the eu experience dealing with sudden increases in migration and unprecedented numbers 
of humanitarian migrants offers several lessons for designing coherent policies. sudden 
surges and historically large flows of migrants can result in public backlash against political 
parties, government institutions, and migrants themselves. in a spring 2016 pew research 
center survey, 88 percent of the swedish, 70 percent of the british, and 67 percent of 
germans  disapproved  of  the  european  unions  handling  of  the  refugee  issue  (connor 
2016).  long-standing  policies  may  be  overturned  and  replaced  with  counterproductive 
measures; disapproval may spill over into support for anti-immigrant political parties. to 
the  extent  possible,  lawmakers  have  a  responsibility  to  prevent  migration  surges,  keep 
migration  legal,  and  maintain  effective  border  controls.  this  requires  recognizing  that 
migration is endogenous; it is influenced by the policies in the receiving countries. well-
meaning policies may backfire if migrants who utilize them are later victimized through 
discrimination or other means or if public backlash reduces support for immigration and 
immigrant integration policies.
the eu experience also demonstrates the need for burden- or cost-sharing across regions, 
particularly when poorer areas receive the lions share of migrants because of their location. 
in the united states, such cost-sharing should occur across levels of government. estimates 
of the fiscal effects of immigration suggest state and local governments bear the fiscal costs 
of low-skilled immigration while the federal government benefits (national academies of 
sciences 2016). there should be a mechanism for federal government transfers to state and 
local governments to offset the costs of mandatory services to immigrants, such as public 
education and emergency healthcare.
finally,  policymakers  should  try  to  make  commitments  that  remove  the  possibility  of 
temporally inconsistent policies or that widen the gap between policy and practice. for 
example, instead of repeatedly extending temporary programs like tps, why not grant 
permanent residence to program beneficiaries after one extension? the 1997 nicaraguan 
adjustment and central american relief act offers a good example of a cohesive policy. 
instead of continuing to extend tps year after year to qualified migrants, the program 
granted permanent residence to migrants from certain countries with open asylum claims. 

190

journal on migration and human securitythe  program  also  was  extended  in  2000  to  qualified  family  members.  with  regard  to 
employment-based migrants, a consistent policy would readily grant permanent resident 
visas to temporary foreign workers who meet the qualifications for permanent visas when 
their temporary visas expire, not require them to meet a higher standard and then wait for 
years for a visa to become available. and removing the ability of a new administration 
to easily reverse course and renege on commitments to admit certain refugees or other 
immigrants seems like a must for temporally consistent policy.

vi. conclusion
policy inconsistency in the us immigration system came to the forefront in the obama 
administration, which may have desired to implement permanent improvements but ended 
up  resorting  to  temporary  piecemeal  fixes. among  other  measures,  it  issued  executive 
actions  to  shield  some  unauthorized  immigrants  from  deportation  and  allow  them  to 
work legally; eased rules that made it difficult for h-1b visa holders to switch jobs while 
waiting for a green card to become available and that prevented their spouses from working 
unless they also had a temporary foreign worker visa; extended the time that international 
students can work in the country after graduating from a us college or university with a 
stem (science, technology, engineering, and math) degree before they must transition to 
a temporary foreign worker or permanent visa; and proposed the immigrant entrepreneur 
rule, which would grant parolee status to qualifying immigrant entrepreneurs.
the fundamental problem with these programs and proposals is that they are executive 
actions  they are discretionary, piecemeal changes that can be readily reversed by future 
administrations. indeed, the trump administration quickly began the process of reversing 
some obama-era immigration policies, again via executive order. neither administrations 
executive  orders  are  the  major  overhaul  of  immigration  policy  that  the  united  states 
desperately needs. the big, bold actions that the country needs to fix its dysfunctional 
policy cannot  and should not  be accomplished via administrative fiat but instead via 
legislation duly deliberated and passed by congress and signed into law by the president.
the outcome of the 2016 presidential race indicated that many americans want a new, 
tougher  immigration  system.  globally,  migration  flows  are  rising,  particularly  of 
humanitarian migrants, and climate change seems likely to further exacerbate migration 
pressures. policymakers who want to maintain the pre-2017 status quo or have even more 
generous policies, such as a large-scale legalization program, need to convince the american 
public of the desirability of such policies. policies that aim to boost the economic benefits 
of immigration while also demonstrating the governments ability to manage migration 
would help build public support for immigration.
inconsistency is one of many serious limitations of current us immigration policy. other 
major concerns from an economic perspective include the inefficient random allocation 
of h-1b visas via a lottery in years when those visas are oversubscribed; limited fiscal 
cost-sharing between the federal government, states, and localities, and the concentration 
of adverse fiscal consequences in states and localities with large numbers of low-skilled 
immigrants;  the  rigid  nature  of  immigration  quotas  by  category  and  country  of  origin; 
and policies that tie temporary foreign workers to an employer and make those workers 

191

creating cohesive, coherent immigration policyvulnerable to exploitation. such policies reduce the economic gains from immigration. the 
humanitarian costs of current refugee policies are even greater still. it is time for a more 
cohesive, coherent immigration system, not just on economic grounds but on humanitarian 
ones as well.

