human insecurity: understanding 
international migration from a 
human security perspective

francesca vietti
independent researcher

todd scribner
united states conference of catholic bishops

executive summary
this article examines contemporary, mass migration from the perspective 
of human security. it tracks the development of the human security model 
of  international  relations,  and  compares  it  to  the  well-established  state 
security model that has served as the dominant paradigm for international 
relations since the seventeenth century. the article argues that human 
security offers a more effective approach to many of the underlying problems 
and  threats  associated  with  mass  migration,  than  does  the  traditional 
state-security model. it challenges national and international authorities 
to address threats to human security, in order to minimize forced migration 
and to create the conditions for migration by choice, not necessity.  

introduction
the peace of westphalia, which brought the thirty years war to an end in 1648, initiated 
a series of significant changes in international affairs. perhaps most prominent was that 
it delegitimized the transnational role of the catholic church and validated the idea that 
international relations should be driven by balance of power considerations rather than the 
ideals of christendom (krasner 2001, 20-29). in doing so, it helped to lay the groundwork 
for  the  emergence  of  the  modern  nation  state.  the  westphalian  model  emphasizes  the 
primacy of state sovereignty, the principle of non-interference by states in the domestic 
affairs of other states, and a territorial conceptualization of security. 
under this model, nation-states are the relevant political actors and maintain their power 
and stability according to a philosophy of si vis pacem para bellum (if you want peace, 
prepare for war). the international system, in turn, consists of equal and sovereign states, 
fighting  against  each  other  in  a  zero-sum  game  to  achieve  their  aims  (commission  on 
global governance 1995, 78). conflicts result from states pursuing their interests: among 
states, the state of nature is a state of war, this is meant not in the sense that war constantly 
occurs but in the sense that, with each state deciding for itself whether or not to use force, 
war may at any time break out (waltz 1979, 102). as a consequence, the goal of securing 
state security is preeminent with each nation seeking to preserve its integrity and to defend 

 2013 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 1 number 1 (2013): 17-31itself against the intrusion of other individuals or state powers intent on asserting their will.
although the state security model remains the dominant paradigm in international affairs, 
political and military crises of the twentieth century have led scholars and politicians to 
search for alternative paradigms. criticism of the westphalian model centers on the inability 
of individual nation states to respond on their own to environmental disaster, famine, the 
forced  relocation  of  peoples,  refugee  flows,  the  spread  of  communicable  diseases,  and 
other security threats (owen 2004, 374). the westphalian model was created to provide 
protection to populations that lived and worked within established boundaries. global or 
supra-regional threats require a response that extends beyond discrete nations. in addition, 
the westphalian model fails in situations in which the sovereign persecutes its own people. 
in contrast to the westphalian paradigm, the human security model adheres to a philosophy 
of  si  vis  pacem  para  pacem  (if  you  want  peace,  prepare  for  peace),  and  consequently 
affirms that all measures should be taken at the national, regional, and international levels 
to  ensure  that  humans  are  born  free  and  equal  in  dignity  and  life  and  can  lead  their 
own lives accordingly (united nations general assembly 1948). such an approach would 
not necessarily seek to displace the westphalian model but would instead put into place 
systems  that  complement  state  security,  enhance  human  rights  and  strengthen  human 
development. a human security approach seeks to protect people against a broad range of 
threats and to empower them to act on their own behalf (commission on human security 
2003, 2). 
the rest of this essay will explore the emergence of the human security model and will 
argue that it provides a more effective approach to many of the underlying problems that 
drive mass migration than does the traditional state-security model.  

the united nations charter, the universal declaration of 
human rights, and the emergence of the human security 
model
the founding of the united nations (un) in the years immediately following world war 
ii signified the initial step in a long process that has led to the emergence of the human 
security model. the uns founding document sets forth one of the institutions primary 
objectives, to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, to reaffirm faith in 
fundamental human rights and to maintain international peace and security (charter of 
the united nations). the un was established on the principle of multilateralism and of the 
sovereign equality of all its members. it created a system of collective security investing 
the security council with the responsibility to protect and maintain international stability. 
the uns revolutionary character lies in its attempt, as highlighted in chapters vi and vii 
of the charter, to prevent the use of force, resolve international disputes by peaceful means, 
and use military force as a last resort for imminent threats, in conformity with the right of 
individual or collective self-defense. 
while affirming human rights as a guiding principle and emphasizing conflict resolution 
by means other than an appeal to arms, the un charter endorsed the classical sovereignty 
principle  of  non-intervention  (krasner  2001,  22).  nevertheless,  its  multidimensional 
understanding of security is not exclusively state-centric, but takes into account:

18

journal on migration and human securitythe respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples, higher 
standards of living, full employment, and conditions of economic and social progress 
and development, solutions of international economic, social, health, and related 
problems, universal respect for, and observance of, human rights and fundamental 
freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language, or religion. (charter of 
the united nations)

the un charter acknowledges that an international order based on peace and international 
security  cannot  refrain  from  considering  individual  well-being,  and  emphasizes  the 
urgency of promoting security in a multiplicity of ways, including in its economic, social, 
developmental, and political dimensions. its multi-layered approach to security highlights 
the well-being of people as a crucial component in building and restoring an international 
order based on democracy, peace and security.
shortly after its founding, the un general assembly adopted the universal declaration 
of human rights which contains principles and norms that have achieved the status of 
customary  law  and  inspired  subsequent  treaties  and  conventions  on  human  rights. the 
declaration  plays  a  pivotal  role  in  support  of  a  human-centered  definition  of  security, 
affirming that everyone is entitled to a social and international order in which the rights 
and freedoms set forth in this declaration can be fully realized (united nations general 
assembly  1948). the  declaration  does  not  use  the  expression  human  security,  but  it 
recognizes that respect for rights is intimately connected to the creation of a just social and 
international framework. it anticipates a human-centered approach to security based on the 
interdependence of peoples.  
although the universal declaration on human rights helped to lay the groundwork for 
the human security paradigm, it was not until nearly a half century later that human security 
emerged as a conceptually distinct alternative to the state security model. the delay in 
developing this perspective was due, at least in part, to the tensions between the united 
states and the soviet union following world war ii. political and philosophical differences 
during the cold war reinforced the state security paradigm as the two superpowers struggled 
to gain superiority over each other. by the 1970s the soviet union had deployed troops 
and  material  support  to  surrogates  in  and  around  ethiopia,  cuba, vietnam,  the  middle 
east and elsewhere as a way to solidify its influence and to undermine american power 
internationally (brzezinski 1992, 39-40). the united states, in turn, sought to maintain 
close political and security ties with western europe through the establishment of nato 
and it provided technical and economic assistance to dozens of additional nations in order 
to inhibit soviet expansion. as one us commentator noted shortly after the fall of the 
soviet union, virtually every dimension and deployment of our (the united states) armed 
forces,  virtually  every  weapons  system  developed,  diplomatic  move  taken  and  foreign 
dollar expended have been shaped primarily by the need to wage and win the cold war 
with communism and to preventor to prevail in, if we could not preventa hot war with 
the soviet union (sorensen 1990, 4).  
the focus on national security during the cold war constrained efforts to provide a more 
comprehensive understanding of security in international affairs. nevertheless, by the early 
eighties there were signs that a re-evaluation was occurring in some circles. two separate 
commissions of this period took steps to move beyond the traditional preoccupation with 

19

migration from a human security perspectivemilitary  security  and  embraced  the  idea  of  human  development.  the  first  commission 
focused  on  economic  development  in  the  global  south  and  the  second  on  the  issue  of 
military  security.  in  1977  the  president  of  the  world  bank  and  former  u.s.  secretary 
of defense robert mcnamara proposed that an international commission comprised of 
distinguished  individuals  from  poor  and  rich  nations  address  the  social  and  economic 
disparities  that  existed  between  developed  and  developing  nations.  the  result  was  the 
independent  commission  on  international  development  issues,  chaired  by  the  former 
german chancelor willy brandt (scully 1982, 12-14). the final commission report noted 
that much of the insecurity in the world was connected with the divisions between rich 
and poor countries  grave injustice and mass starvation causing additional instability, 
and it proposed that if military expenditure can be controlled and some of the savings 
related to development, the worlds security can be increased, and the mass of mankind 
currently excluded from a decent life can have a brighter future (independent commission 
on international development issues 1980, 124-5). 
in 1982, the independent commission on disarmament and security issues, chaired by 
the  swedish  politician  olof  palme  raised  up  the  language  of  common  security.  in  a 
speech to a special session of the un general assembly in the summer of 1982, palme 
argued against policies that sought strategic advantage via military superiority, and called 
for an end to the arms race with complete disarmament the final goal and a commitment to 
joint survival rather than permanent competition (palme 1982). building on the importance 
of international solidarity, the commissions final report states that lasting security  
can only be achieved through co-operation based on the principle of equity, justice, and 
reciprocity  and  common  security  requires  that  people  live  in  dignity  and  peace,  that 
they have enough to eat and are able to find work and live in a world without poverty and 
destitution (commission on disarmament and security issues 1982). 
taken  together,  the  commissions  initiated  a  shift  from  an  understanding  of  security 
based exclusively on military threats and national security to an open-ended, broader and 
contextual  definition. they  recognized  that  while  the  developed  world  was  focused  on 
military issues, third world security was threatened by poverty, deprivation and economic 
inequality.  they  understood  that  the  developed  world  (in  particular)  must  deal  more 
intentionally with these non-military threats to security. 
although these commissions promoted themes consistent with the idea of human security, 
it was not until the 1994 human development report: new dimensions of human security 
by the united nations development program (undp) that this approach became explicit. 
building on conceptual developments related to security that occurred in the 1980s, the 
report emphasized that social and economic insecurity threatened international stability 
(timothy 2004, 19-20). it opened with the statement that: 

for too long, nations have sought arms to protect their security. for most people today, 
a feeling of insecurity arises more from worries about daily life than from the dread of a 
cataclysmic world eventmost people instinctively understand what security means. 
it means safety from the constant threats of hunger, disease, crime and repression. it 
also means protections from sudden and hurtful disruptions in the patterns of our daily 
life. (undp 1994, 3) 

20

journal on migration and human securitythe  1994  undp  report  assumes  that  human  security  consists  of  two  complementary 
elements:  freedom  from  fear  (e.g.,  threats  from  war,  conflict  and  state  sponsored 
violence) and freedom from want (e.g., preventable diseases, economic hardship, poverty, 
developmental concerns) (undp 1994, 24). while experts and academics have debated 
the usefulness of defining human security in these terms, freedom from fear and want are 
interlinked and fundamental to human security.  the failure to achieve the conditions that 
allow persons to live their lives free from fear and want can contribute to forced migration. 
the report identifies seven categories of threats to human security: economic, food, health, 
environmental, personal, community and political (undp 1994). for example, the report 
views access to food and clean water, protection against sudden, unpredictable violence, 
employment opportunities, and basic forms of healthcare as fundamentally inter-connected 
conditions of human security.  failure to meet these basic needs threatens to exacerbate the 
conditions that drive unregulated migration. to meet them, in turn, requires a comprehensive 
notion of development that is economic, political and social in nature. 
to appreciate the findings of the 1994 human development report, it is necessary to situate 
it within the larger series of human development reports that were launched in 1990 under 
the leadership of the pakistani economist mahbub ul haq. as defined in the 1990 report, the 
overarching principle that should guide an understanding of development is that people 
are  the  real  wealth  of  a  nation  and  the  goal  of  development  is  to  create  an  enabling 
environment for people to enjoy long, healthy and creative lives (undp 1990, 9). 
according  to  this  understanding,  development  cannot  be  limited  to  gross  national 
product (gnp).  rather, a much broader set of metrics needs to be considered. such a 
vision seeks a paradigm shift that puts people at the center of the development process, that 
benefits everyone and not a select few, that looks to the economy as a means and not as 
an end in itself, and that takes seriously the well-being of future generations (undp 1994, 
4).  as a way to reach beyond the narrow economic conception of development, the human 
development reports initiated the human development index (hdi), which uses a variety 
of measures to judge a countrys development performance. successive reports built on the 
hdi and touched on some of the key elements that affected human development, including 
globalization, technology, human rights, inequality and human security. 
the  authors  of  the  1994  report  distinguish  human  development  from  human  security  
by noting that the former consists of widening the range of peoples choices and means 
that people can exercise these choices safely and freely, and that they can be relatively 
confident that the opportunities they have today are not totally lost tomorrow (undp 
1994). the failure to provide security on a human level can disrupt development, while 
the failure to establish mechanisms for development can exacerbate insecurity and lead to 
increased deprivation. 
the human security concept gained momentum in the new millennium. in september 2000, 
un general secretary kofi annan reiterated the challenge to the international community to 
achieve the twin goals of freedom from fear and want. in response, the japanese government 
formed the  commission  on  human  security  that,  while  functioning  as  an  independent 
body, maintained close ties to the un (commission on human security 2000, iv). similar 
to its predecessors, the commission sought to expand on traditional notions of security and 
to move from a state-centered focus to include non-traditional threats. in its final report 

21

migration from a human security perspectivethe commission sought to generate public support for human security, use this concept 
as a tool for policy formulation and implementation, and propose a program of action to 
address critical and pervasive threats to security. it posited that:  

human  security  means  protecting  fundamental  freedomsfreedoms  that  are  the 
essence  of  life.  it  means  protecting  people  from  critical  (severe)  and  pervasive 
(widespread) threats and situations. it means using processes that build on peoples 
strengths and aspirations. it means creating political, social, environmental, economic, 
military and cultural systems that together give people the building blocks of survival, 
livelihood and dignity. (commission on human security 2000)

the commission on human security argued that states needed to work together to help 
create stable conditions in which local communities could thrive, particularly in regions 
characterized by political instability and economic insecurity. 
in short, the un development program and the commission viewed human security from 
a  human-centered  model  focused  on  a  comprehensive  understanding  of  development, 
rather than one focused solely on the economic aspects of a persons or communitys life.  
they encouraged the establishment of rights-respecting, political structures, employment-
producing  economic  institutions,  and  cultures  that  did  not  discriminate  according  race, 
religion, gender, or any other arbitrary classification.
as the commission noted:

human security policies must consider the fight against poverty as a major challenge 
for the international community. it is imperative to develop global strategies supporting 
growth and sustainable development while at the same time implementing policies of 
economic development and social protection at the national level. (commission on 
human security 2003)

sustainable  development  requires  more  than  strategies  to  further  economic  growth;  it 
requires political and social institutions that will promote human security.  according to the 
1994 un development report, such institutions should be built on the local and national 
level,  but  it  is  equally  important  to  construct  new  institutions  that  can  help  to  provide 
global governance in an increasingly interconnected world. events in one corner of the 
world increasingly have repercussions in other areas (arias 1998; kay 1997). 
migration both results from and can lead to human insecurity. disruptions in the economic 
lives  of  individuals  and  their  families,  dislocation  due  to  environmental  disasters,  and 
political and religious persecution constitute a few of the threats to human security that 
drive migration on a mass scale.  

migration, the state and human security
international migration is defined by the international organization for migration (iom) 
as the movement of persons who leave their country of origin or the country of habitual 
residence, to establish themselves either permanently or temporarily in another country 
(international  organization  for  migration  2005).1  since  at  least  the  emergence  of  the 
1  according to the international organization for migration there are approximately 214 million international 

22

journal on migration and human securitywestphalian  state,  migration  from  one  country  to  another  has  been  primarily  regulated 
by the decisions of the sovereign regarding who is allowed into and out of their national 
boundaries. the global commission on international migration highlighted the fact that 
controlling who enters and remains on their territory is an integral part of the sovereignty 
of  states  (global  commission  on  international  migration  2005,  66).2    borders  define 
territories and the notion of territoriality has been central in the formation of nation-state 
(battistella 2005, 1).  consequently, one of the primary ways that sovereign nation states 
have  contended  with  irregular  migration  is  through  border  enforcement  mechanisms. 
irregular migration is perceived as an attack on state sovereignty that brings into question 
the states ability to exercise control over its spatial and territorial domain. in recent years, 
many states have spent immense amounts on border security through the deployment of 
immigration officers and frontier guards, the construction of barriers and border fences, the 
interdiction of migrants in transit, and large-scale removals and detention. 
according to the migration policy institute, in fiscal year 2012, the united states invested 
nearly 18 billion dollars in the federal governments two main immigration enforcement 
agencies:  us  customs  and  border  protection  and  the  us  immigration  and  customs 
enforcement. this amounts to fifteen times the spending level for the immigration and 
naturalization service in 1986, and exceeds funding for all other principal federal criminal 
law enforcement agencies combined (meissner, kerwin, chishti and bergeron 2013, 50). 
at the heart of these efforts is the attempt to maintain state security in the face of what is 
perceived as a serious threat to national autonomy.
while spending on border security would continue under a human security approach, the 
point of emphasis would differ. instead of simply closing the door behind us in order to 
keep the less fortunate people outside a human security approach would emphasize the 
multiple factors that give rise to migration flows, including economic deprivation, political 
persecution, and ethnic cleansing, and would seek to address these conditions before they 
lead people to migrate (thakur 2003, 5).
the traditional distinction between voluntary migrants or free population movements 
and forced or involuntary highlights the complexity of the challenge. forced migrants 
are driven from their home countries by war, violent conflicts, human rights violations and 
abuses or discrimination (fisher, martin and straubhaar 1997, 50). voluntary migrants, on 
the other hand, are assumed to have migrated through free choice rather than force. 
situations of involuntary and voluntary migration can be clear cut in many instances. yet 
the  distinction  between  forced  and  voluntary  migration  blurs  in  cases  involving  south-
south migration (e.g. mozambique to south africa) or migration of the very poor from the 
developing to the developed world. social, political, and economic insecurity can compel 
people to move from one place to another, even if they do not experience overt forms of 
persecution that are normally assumed to drive involuntary migration.3 while a specific 

migrants  worldwide  today  (3.1%  of  the  worlds  population).  http://www.iom.int/cms/en/sites/iom/home/
about-migration/facts--figures-1.html .
2  the global commission on international migration was launched by the secretary general of the united 
nations in 2003 with the mandate to create a framework that would allow the international community to 
respond to the issue of mass migration. 
3  the geneva convention relating to the status of refugees has defined these overt forms of persecution 

23

migration from a human security perspectivemigratory act might appear in all respects to be voluntary, in reality the decision to move 
is made within a context where the individual or group is faced with no alternatives since 
staying in situ is not a realistic option (kothari 2002, 20). endemic poverty, paired with 
the absence of a political voice, can precipitate migration as a survival strategy (global 
commission on international migration 2005, 68).4
both alternativesmigration that is forced by human rights abuses or persecution, and 
migration that results from a severe lack of  economic, political, and social opportunities, 
on the other diminish, if not effectively eliminate, the ability of persons to migrate out 
of choice rather than necessity. to create a world in which individual persons are as free 
from fear and from want as is humanly possible, the international community must engage 
in comprehensive development efforts.

addressing  the  root  causes  of  migration:  investing  in 
development
rather  than  trying  to  deal  with  migration  on  the  back-end,  as  the  state-security  model 
tends to do, the human security model seeks to identify and alleviate threats that lead to 
forced and irregular migration. the un nations former secretary general, kofi annan 
called on the international community to take a more comprehensive look at the various 
dimensions of the migration issue, which now involves hundreds of millions of people 
and affects countries of origin, transit and destination [and] to understand better the causes 
of international flows of people and their complex interrelationship with development 
(report of the united nations general secretary 2002). 
perhaps the most obvious development needs are economic. disparities in wealth between 
the poorest and the richest countries have expanded rapidly in the last two centuries, with 
differentials  in  income  between  them  having  grown  from  3  to  1  in  1820  to  72  to  1  in 
1992 (undp 1999, 38). approximately 1.3 billion people in the developing world live in 
extreme poverty, or on less than $1.25 per day, 780 million people lack access to potable 
water, and roughly 2.5 billion people, or 40 percent of the worlds population, do not have 
access to safe sanitation facilities (the world bank 2012; salaam-blyther 2012, 1). poverty 
of this magnitude sets the conditions for eruptions of violence and conflict, and increases 
the  likelihood  of  forced  migration  (in  response  to  conflict)  or  migration  in  search  of  a 
better life. alleviating these conditions through long-term economic development brings 
with it the promise of greater stability for those who benefit from such growth and new 
opportunity.
that said, it is important to note that in the short term initiatives to promote economic 
development may encourage, rather than discourage emigration. with the expansion of 
capitalist markets globally, disruptions occur in local economies for a variety of reasons, 

to include persecution on the basis of race, nationality, religion, membership of a particular social group or 
political opinion.
4  a third alternative is worth noting here as well: situations in which the poorest of the worlds poor who 
are stuck in a state of systemic, absolute poverty and are unable to migrate as a consequence of their total 
lack of resources. migration is only a realistic alternative for those who may be considered poor, but are 
not necessarily amongst the chronically poor the chronically poor are the most excluded, they are unable 
unless forced to choose migration as a way of mediating their excessive marginality (kothari 2002, 14).

24

journal on migration and human securityincluding  increased  mechanization  which  decreases  the  need  for  manual  labor,  land 
consolidation which can undermine traditional approaches to land ownership and tenure, 
and  the  construction  of  foreign-owned  factories  which  can  weaken  the  local  peasant 
economy. these economic disruptions can increase the likelihood of migration, at least 
until the relevant economies have re-stabilized and economic opportunities have emerged. 
in addition, because economic development helps to enhance livelihoods within a given 
locale, there is also the possibility that people who had considered emigrating, but could 
not afford it, will gain access to more capital or otherwise be able to move and will decide 
to do so (massey et al. 1993, 446).
creating economic opportunity, including dignified working conditions and the absence of 
exploitation of workers and the environment, would be an important step in providing a 
long term solution to human insecurity. easing some of the underlying causes of human 
insecurity would, in turn, ease some of the pressures that promote international migration. 
with this in mind, from a human security perspective the movement of people should be 
looked at comprehensively, taking into account the political, civil, security, economic and 
social dimensions affecting peoples decision to move (commission on human security 
2003). human beings cannot be analyzed simply from the framework of homo-economicus; 
a range of factors beyond economic considerations play an important role in decisions to 
migrate.
human rights also need to be honored in migrant sending, transit and receiving nations. 
attempts to understand the underlying causes of migration have to take into account the fact 
that the absence of peace and security, human rights violations and the varying degrees of 
development of judicial and democratic institutions are all factors affecting international 
migration  (the  un  international  conference  on  population  and  development  1994, 
par.  10.1).  political  and  social  conditions  strongly  influence  the  likelihood  that  people 
will choose to migrate. the responsibility to respond to human security threats, and in 
particular human rights abuses, discrimination and violence that can cause migration, lies 
with national, regional and international authorities. it is important to engage in preventive 
efforts that can defuse these threats prior to their reaching a crisis level, given that the 
prevention of violent conflict is far better and more cost-effective than the cure (report of 
the secretary general 2001, 1).
determining who is primarily responsible for responding to the humanitarian, economic, 
and political crises that drive migration can be complicated.  what role should sub-national 
authorities have in responding to crises and at what point does their failure to respond 
require intervention by higher level authorities? when, where or how (if at all) should the 
international community intervene in a potential or active crisis?  the westphalian model 
still guides international relations and state sovereignty remains an important philosophical 
principle  that  needs  to  be  taken  seriously. the  principle  of  subsidiarity  may  also  offer 
useful guidance in determining when national, regional or international authorities have a 
responsibility to act.  this principle dictates that issues should be addressed by the authority 
that can effectively handle them and is closest to them, typically the most local and least 
centralized authority.
often, the initial responsibility lies with the national sovereign who is obligated to take 
the necessary efforts to ensure accountability and good governance, protect human rights, 

25

migration from a human security perspectivepromote  social  and  economic  development  and  ensure  a  fair  distribution  of  resources 
(commission  on  intervention  and  state  sovereignty  2001).  in  cases  of  state-sponsored 
persecution  or  when  the  sovereign  is  ill-equipped  to  respond  to  the  threats  to  human 
life  and  dignity,  the  international  community  or  regional  authorities  will  need    to  take 
a  more  proactive  role,  whether  through  development  assistance  and  other  efforts  to 
help address the root cause of potential conflict; or efforts to provide support for local 
initiatives to advance good governance, human rights, or the rule of law; or good offices 
missions, mediation efforts and other efforts to promote dialogue or reconciliation. in some 
cases international support for prevention efforts may take the form of inducements; in 
others, it may involve a willingness to apply tough and perhaps even punitive measures 
(commission on intervention and state sovereignty 2001). 

migrants human security and the human rights framework
having discussed how a human security paradigm addresses the causes of migration, it is 
important to touch on the threats that migrants face and the abuses they endure in transit.  
from  a  human  security  perspective,  it  is  crucial  to  put  into  place  legal  protections  for 
people on the move and to establish institutions and structures that can effectively enforce 
those protections.
such  threats  are  particularly  acute  for  forced  migrants,  irregular  migrants,  women  and 
children, and other vulnerable populations. sexual abuse, for example, is unfortunately an 
all too common experience, particularly among young women and girls who reside in camps 
and who may be subject to sexual exploitation by the very people there to care for them, 
including peacekeepers, humanitarian workers and even teachers (kirk and taylor 2007, 
14). a recent study co-sponsored by unhcr and save the children-uk that focused on 
sexual violence against refugee children in guinea, liberia and sierra leone found that the 
most frequent exploiters of children in camps were agency staff from local, international, 
and un agencies. the report called for reforms that included education programs for those 
at risk, greater community involvement within the camp and the surrounding locale, and 
more widespread enforcement of legal standards (un high commission for refugees and 
save the children 2002).
sexual and physical violence is also a threat in transit, particularly for irregular migrants 
who move outside of established legal channels. the report, invisible victims: migrants 
on the move in mexico, which was issued by amnesty international in 2010, highlights 
some of the threats that migrants in mexico confront as they head to the united states 
and canada, including kidnappings for the purpose of extortion by criminal enterprises 
in which local police are all too often complicit. as many as six in ten migrant women 
and  girls  without  legal  status  are  sexually  assaulted  during  their  migration.  hundreds 
of unauthorized migrants go missing or are killed each year as they head north toward 
the united states, presumably due to violence, exposure to the elements, or dehydration 
(amnesty  international  2010).  although  the  report  focuses  specifically  on  migration 
through mexico to the united states, it is easy to imagine that similar threats confront 
migrants across the globe.
both human trafficking and human smuggling pose a continual danger to migrants. human 
smugglers  often  exploit  and  even  enslave  migrants,  including  into  lives  of  prostitution 

26

journal on migration and human security(talsma 2012). human trafficking offends human dignity and the human rights set forth 
in  the  the  universal  declaration  of  human  rights  and  related  covenants  and  treaties. 
migrant detention and the denial of due process protections in the deportation process also 
raise human rights concerns. family separation due to deportation, lack of access to health 
care and education, and additional forms of labor exploitation also requires careful study 
and reforms to existing political structures, laws and policies. 

conclusion
it  will  become  increasingly  difficult  to  sustain  an  enduring,  reliable  national  security 
framework without a strong response to that conditions that create human insecurity. a 
focus on human security holds out the promise of identifying and responding to emergent 
threats to human persons and, in doing so, avoiding crises that could prove destabilizing. 
this framework provides the international community with the opportunity to address and 
stop potential crises from becoming actual ones. it can also help to identify the underlying 
causes of forced migration and point to solutions that will help make the migration process 
more rational and humane.
the  commission  on  human  security  and  the  global  commission  on  international 
migration have put forth some broad recommendations regarding critical and pervasive 
threats to human security that the international community should address.  among these 
recommendations  is  that  states  not  simply  implement  restrictive  immigration  measures 
in attempting to address irregular migration, but should respond to the underlying causes 
of  migration. this  could  include  the  implementation  foreign  aid  strategies  that  seek  to 
buttress local economies so that people have economic opportunities in their homeland. 
it could also entail governments pressuring the leadership of other countries to respect 
the human rights of its citizenry so as to maximize freedom and opportunity. such efforts 
would help to create a context in which migration occurs more frequently by choice rather 
than necessity. 
states and the international community should ensure that people have the opportunity to 
meet their basic needs, exercise their rights, and realize their potential. people should not 
be forced to migrate in search of the conditions that would allow them to live secure and 
dignified lives. international migration should be managed more effectively through greater 
consultation and cooperation between states at the regional level, and more effective dialogue 
and cooperation among governments and between international organizations at the global 
level. dialogue must be based on an appreciation of the close linkage between international 
migration  and  development  and  economic  security,  which  include  trade  and  foreign  aid 
policy, state security, and the implementation of political institutions that can protect human 
rights. finally, receiving countries should assist newly arriving migrants to integrate and 
should promote social cohesion. integration efforts should be actively supported by local 
and national authorities, as well as by employers and other members of civil society. they 
should be based on a commitment to non-discrimination and gender equity.
the above recommendations provide some preliminary guidelines related to the safeguarding 
of  human  security  and  the  protection  of  migrant  populations,  but  further  research  and 
analysis is needed on these issues. for example, since world war ii the influence of non-
governmental organizations and multinational corporations has become more pronounced, 

27

migration from a human security perspectiveas has the challenge they pose to traditional state-centered authority. to what extent will 
this shifting balance of power affect human security considerations and, in the process, 
either promote or alleviate pressures that drive international migration? 
the role of religious institutions also provides a promising area for further research under 
the human security paradigm. to what extent do the social teachings of religious bodies 
promote an ethic that supports a human security paradigm or one that continues to support 
a  more  traditional,  state-centered  security  model?  understanding  the  extent  to  which 
the moral and political traditions of religious institutions are in alignment with a human 
security perspective could offer strong support for this paradigm. it could also open up new 
and potentially fruitful platforms for discussion between thinkers with secular and those 
with religious worldviews.  
while institutional considerations of this sort are important, particular threats to human 
security  deserve  substantial  attention.  climate  change  and  environmental  degradation 
are  increasingly  important  drivers  of  migration,  as  people  are  forced  from  their  lands 
because of rising sea levels, prolonged droughts, and other forms of hazardous weather. 
how should the international community respond to environmental migrants, and what 
steps should be taken to address the causes of this kind of migration? furthermore, how 
can the international community help to prevent humanitarian crises that are related to 
conflict over natural resources and dwindling economic opportunities in certain parts of the 
world, which often result in situations of social instability and mass migration? while this 
essay provides an overview of the relationship between the human security paradigm and 
mass migration, more research is needed into the causes of mass migration and effective 
responses under a human security paradigm. 

