identifying and measuring 
the lifelong human capital 
of unskilled migrants in the 
mexico-us migratory circuit1 

jacqueline hagan
university of north carolina at chapel hill

jean luc demonsant 
ceps/instead, centre for population, poverty and public policy studies 

sergio chvez 
rice university

executive summary
most human capital and migration studies classify migrants with limited 
formal  education  as  unskilled,  despite  substantial  skills  developed 
through  job  and  life  experiences.    drawing  on  a  binational  multi-stage 
research project that involved interviews with 320 mexican migrants and 
return migrants in north carolina and guanajuato, mexico, we identify 
the lifelong human capital they acquired and transferred throughout their 
careers and discover that these include not only basic education and english, 
but also technical and social skills and competences acquired informally on 
and off the job throughout the course of ones life.  we further find that the 
learning and transfer of skills is a lifelong, gendered process, reflecting 
the different social contexts and jobs in which men and women learn. in 
this  paper  we  document  several  mobility  pathways  associated  with  the 
acquisition and transfer of skills across the migratory circuit, including 
reskilling, occupational mobility, job jumping, and entrepreneurship. 
our study has broad implications for the migration policies of both the 
us  and  mexico.  us  immigration  policy  confers  preference  to  skilled 
immigrants who rank high on traditional human capital characteristics, 
such as education levels and other formal credentials, but limits the entry 
1 please send all correspondence to jacqueline hagan, department of sociology, university of north carolina 
at  chapel  hill,  chapel  hill,  nc  27599-3210.  funding  for  this  project  was  provided  by  grants  from  the 
unc carolina population center, the unc research council, the research program of the mexican higher 
education secretary (promep-sep), and a woodrow wilson fellowship. we are grateful to the team of field 
workers: jonathan moreno gmez, gabriel gutirrez olvera, ftima del rayo ornelas ramrez, christian 
palacios morales, erika rodrguez ortega, ruy valds benavides, brianna mullis, and andrea perdoma. we 
would like to also thank joshua wassink, annie lee, holly straudt-epsteiner, luis fernando lpez ornelas, 
and miguel leboreiro for research provided with data management and analysis.

 2014 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 2 number 2 (2014): 76-100 of  unskilled  migrants,  a  categorization  that  ignores  the  substantial 
informal skills they bring to us labor markets.  instead of focusing only 
on the continued expansion of immigration policy p