separated families: barriers 
to family reunification after 
deportation

deborah a. boehm 
university of nevada, reno

executive summary
this  paper  outlines  the  complexities    and  unlikelihood    of  keeping 
families together when facing, or in the aftermath of deportation. after 
discussing  the  context  that  limits  or  prevents  reunification  among 
immigrant  families  more  generally,  i  outline  several  of  the  particular 
ways that families are divided when a member is deported. drawing on 
case studies from longitudinal ethnographic research in mexico and the 
united  states,  i  describe:  1)  the  difficulties  in  successfully  canceling 
deportation orders, 2) the particular limitations to family reunification for 
us citizen children when a parent is deported, and 3) the legal barriers 
to authorized return to the united states after deportation. i argue that 
without comprehensive immigration reform and concrete possibilities for 
relief, mixed-status and transnational families will continue to be divided. 
existing laws do not adequately address family life and the diverse needs 
of individuals as members of families, creating a humanitarian crisis both 
within and beyond the borders of the united states. the paper concludes 
with recommendations for immigration policy reform and suggestions for 
restructuring administrative processes that directly impact those who have 
been deported and their family members.

introduction
in recent years, the united states has deported an unprecedented number of noncitizens, 
with  more  than  three  million  in  the  last  decade  alone,  including  a  record  high  year  in 
2012 of 409,849 deportations (ice 2016, 2). and, apprehensions, the detention of foreign 
nationals,  and  the  increased  threat  of  deportations  have  come  to  define  the  weeks  and 
months following the inauguration of president trump. transnational and mixed-status 
families face new risks of deportation as executive orders are announced and implemented, 
even  when  family  life  is  not  explicitly  addressed.1  over  the  past  decade,  deportations 
have  resulted  in  families  divided  like  never  before,  and  based  on  the  current  chaos, 
 
1   see border security and immigration enforcement improvements, exec. order no. 13767, 82 fed. reg. 
8793 (jan. 25, 2017), and protecting the nation from foreign terrorist entry into the united states, exec. 
order no. 13769, 82 fed. reg. 8977 (jan. 27, 2017), as well as memos from secretary john kelly (2017a; 
2017b) outlining their implementation.

 2017 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 5 number 2 (2017): 401-416unpredictability, and even delirium caused by state-enacted removals (kanstroom and 
lykes 2015), this trend is likely to intensify.
as i argue, high rates of deportations and increased deportability (de genova 2002), or 
the threat of deportation, are causing a humanitarian crisis that is displacing individuals 
and separating families in unprecedented ways. immigration and deportation have long 
impacted families, but an overall increase in deportations coupled with a growing number 
of mixed-status families  there were an estimated 3.3 million mixed-status households in 
the united states in 2014 (warren and kerwin 2017, 1)  mean that today families face 
divisions like never before. millions of people have been and will continue to be impacted, 
including noncitizens who are deported and their undocumented migrant family members, 
but also a high number of us citizens with family ties to deportees. 
in large part, the current crisis stems from decades without policies that adequately outline 
possibilities for maintaining or allowing for family reunification. instead, us immigration 
policy has been made up of a patchwork of particular laws, de facto practices, administrative 
procedures,  executive  orders,  and,  significantly,  decades  without  new  legislation  that 
considers family separation. not since the immigration reform and control act of 1986 
(irca) has the united states passed legislation that included a broad path to citizenship 
for undocumented immigrants. thus, without immigration law reform, immigrant families 
will continue to suffer  through migration, but increasingly as a result of deportation. 
indeed, it is those on the ground  immigrants and their loved ones, including children, 
parents, siblings, and partners  who are paying the price (capps et al. 2007) for an 
absence of laws that consider the humanity of immigrants and those connected to them.
the  haphazard  and  unpredictable  character  of  immigration  policy  and  its  absence  in 
recent decades  and in recent months  has resulted in a situation that imperils families 
throughout the united states. the current policy context makes deportation a legal and 
practical dead-end for most immigrants and their families: once families experience the 
deportation of a loved one, there are few, if any, options for family reunification in the united 
states through legal channels. building on policy analysis and longitudinal ethnographic 
research in mexico and the united states, i outline the complexities and unlikelihood of 
achieving family reunification in the current climate. after providing background about 
the policies that shape family reunification and perpetuate family separation, i discuss three 
case studies as a way to illustrate the specific challenges that families face when a loved 
one is deported. i conclude with recommendations for policy reform as well as suggestions 
for temporary actions that might address family ties and better support family unity. 

background: existing policy (and its absence)
the policies that direct family reunification are legally and logistically complicated. the 
principle of family reunification has been established through the passage of several laws 
over time, including the emergency quota act of 1921, the mccarran-walter act of 1952, 
and the immigration and nationality act (ina), or hart-celler act of 1965 (maddali 2016, 
111).2 although immigrants with family members who are us citizens or lawful permanent 
2   see maddali (2016) for discussion of the development of family reunification as a guiding principle over 
time.

402

journal on migration and human securityresidents may be able to change their status based on family relations, family reunification 
is, as anita ortiz maddali (2016, 111) outlines, a principle that is limited. many families 
do not include members with a status that makes them eligible for family reunification in 
the first place and certain family members are prioritized and/or excluded from the process, 
making family reunification a challenge  if not impossibility  for most immigrant 
and mixed-status families.
the laws that changed the nations immigration priorities to emphasize family reunification 
have brought (some) families together. still, as i have argued elsewhere, such legislation 
has  also  divided  families,  especially  through  processes  and  procedures  that  engage 
specifically with individuals (boehm 2012, 61-62; see also thronson 2015). by singling 
out the border and the individual as the sites for regulatory enforcement (sassen 1996, 
10), the us government does not systematically identify migrants as members of families, 
even as its policies explicitly name family reunification as a priority. thus, paradoxically, a 
focus on individuals creates mixed-status families and obstructs family reunification even 
as it continues to be ostensibly a guiding principle of us immigration policy.  
additionally, immigration laws influence families even when they do not explicitly focus 
on family life. as an example, consider the illegal immigration reform and immigrant 
responsibility act (iirira) of 1996. iiriras emphasis on enforcement and penalties 
rather  than  immigrant  inclusion  has  had  a  devastating  and  lasting  impact  on  families, 
separating  relatives  because  of  the  laws  rigidity  and  the  fact  that  it  provides  so  few 
opportunities for relief (clinic 2005). the legal ramifications of iirira, the merger 
of criminal and immigration law (stumpf 2006, 369), and the increased criminalization 
of immigration more generally over time (e.g., dowling and inda 2013; stumpf 2006) 
have translated into public discourse that crudely casts migrants as criminals. depictions 
of  migrants  as  members  of  families        mothers,  fathers,  children,  partners,  siblings, 
grandparents, aunts and uncles, cousins, and other kin relations  are largely absent from 
political and policy debates.
families  are  also  impacted  by  a  variety  of  other  barriers  and  challenges,  including 
unpredictable  and 
inconsistent  yet  virulent  enforcement  practices.  immigration 
enforcement, raids, and increased policing clearly have detrimental effects on communities, 
and especially on families and children (capps et al. 2007; dreby 2012; thronson 2015). 
under  the  obama  administration,  the  specifics  of  apprehension  and  deportation  were, 
despite national priorities, often arbitrary depending on particular circumstances, place of 
residence, and the actions of individual law enforcement officers, immigration officials, 
and judges. now, as a result of recent executive action, even ostensible national priorities 
have been suspended, such that under the trump administration, randomness and chaos are 
ever more present.
and finally, administrative processes separate families and prevent family reunification. for 
example, not all familial relationships fit the preference categories outlined by immigration 
law  (see thronson  2015),  significant  backlogs  in  processing  can  result  in  wait  periods 
that extend for a decade or more (clinic 2005, 3-9; kerwin 2014, 336), and events that 
are commonplace  such as entry without inspection or the use of a borrowed social 
security number and other forms of identity loan (horton 2016, 73)  can bar migrants 
from living in the united states for years or indefinitely (see gomberg-muoz 2016). and, 

403

separated families: barriers to family reunification after deportationthe lengthy and extensive bureaucratic processes required for family reunification result 
in policies that are implemented in contradictory ways. these different factors mean that 
family reunification, even if codified through law, is never fully realized in practice and 
instead continues to be unattainable for millions of individuals and their loved ones. 
so,  while  legislation  has  eliminated  national  origin  quotas  and  established  family 
unification as a guiding principle for us immigration law (desipio and de la garza 1998, 
42), us immigration policies repeatedly create circumstances that divide families (abrams 
and piacenti 2014; thronson 2006; thronson 2007). existing laws provide an incomplete 
set of guidelines for considering family relations. and, because the principle of family 
reunification  already limited in the case of immigration  does not apply to families 
facing the deportation of an individual, the reunification of family members in the united 
states can be nearly impossible during deportation proceedings or after a family member 
has been deported. in most cases, families have little or no recourse or opportunities to 
come together after a deportation separates them across borders.
thus, the nations contemporary immigration system is defined in large part by its gaps 
and a lack of sound legislation that might address the more than 11 million immigrants 
currently living in the united states without authorization and their families. this articles 
proposals center on how to rethink immigration law and administrative procedures, and 
potential ways  through both legislation and the administration of policy  to ensure that 
families divided by immigration status and deportation can stay together. in the following 
discussion,  i  outline  three  cases  that  underscore  some  of  the  challenges  or  barriers  to 
reunification that existing policies present. family reunification  already complicated in 
the context of immigration  is that much more inaccessible when migrants are deported.

exceptional and extremely unusual hardship

case study: federico and gaby

for federico and gaby, deportation meant packing up a home and making arrangements 
for a sudden departure, but it also required gathering up a life of 25 years and making 
choices  about  what  would  have  to  be  left  behind.  federico  and  his  family  parted  with 
nearly everything: we lost the house, we lost many things. we gave things away. we tried 
to make arrangements so that we could leave, but, well . . . we lost a lot. many of the 
familys losses were material, but, as federico described, the less tangible losses were far 
more profound. 
born in a small, rural community in zacatecas, mexico, federico migrated as a young man, 
in the 1980s, to los angeles, california. several months later, his wife, gaby, followed, 
and they made the united states their home, living for more than two decades in southern 
california. after spending all of his adult life in the united states as an undocumented 
migrant, federico wanted desperately to fix his papers, to change his status so that he 
would be authorized to be in the country. federico was not comfortable living hidden, and 
so he consulted with an attorney and was told that he was eligible to apply for permanent 
residency. he felt a deep connection  and had given much  to the nation. as he told 

404

journal on migration and human securityme: i value the way of life in the united states. the united states is a good country. 
he worked for the same company for 16 years, had five us citizen children (ages 10-24), 
volunteered at prisons through his local parish, and was part of a strong network of family, 
friends, neighbors, coworkers, and church members.
he began the paperwork to process a change in immigration status for gaby and himself, 
but after the applications were submitted, the couple was contacted by us citizenship 
and immigration services (uscis) and told that they were not actually eligible to receive 
green cards. instead, federico and gaby were placed in removal proceedings and told that 
they were likely going to be deported. the couple also learned that the attorney who had 
required advance payment and submitted the applications was not an attorney at all, but a 
notary public. the notary had, erroneously and intentionally, told federico and gaby that 
they were eligible for us lawful permanent residency. they had been the victims of fraud. 
their effort to obey the law and to do the right thing started a process in motion that had 
the seemingly inevitable end of deportation.
federico immediately hired an immigration attorney. however, despite efforts to cancel 
the removal order, federico and gaby were told that, five years after first filing for an 
adjustment of status, they had to leave the country or face imprisonment. when the letter 
arrived informing us that we had to leave, it was very difficult. i thought, how am i going 
to do this? what am i going to do back in mexico? after so many years here, so many 
years that my family lived here . . . federicos voice trailed off, his eyes teary. i feel it was 
caused by the judges bad decisions. im not saying that we were without fault, but judges 
should consider the family. 
each time i visited with federico and his family in mexico, he spoke of the hardships 
they  faced:  federicos  successful  career  had  been  disrupted  and  he  was  forced  to  start 
anew financially, the family could not live together in the united states with government 
authorization, and, especially painful, federico and gaby were unable to be present for 
the birth of their first grandchild. federico repeated how much he hoped that he and gaby 
would  be  able  to  return  to  the  united  states.  he  told  me  that  they  would  only  do  so, 
however, if they were able to find a way to go home within the boundaries of the law. 
for some time, i received emails from federico inquiring about the possibility of a pardon 
or an appeal. perhaps there is another way to receive permission to enter the country? 
he  asked  about  potential  ways  to  change  his  status:  could  an  attorney  find  a  way  for 
them to return? would a pardon be possible? was there any way to fix the situation and 
ultimately reverse the deportation?3

* * *

the  case  of  federico  and  gaby  points  out  some  of  the  limitations that  divide  families 
as they face the possibility, or as the direct result, of the deportation of family members. 
upon  receiving  the  letter  outlining  their  removal,  federico  and  gaby  immediately 
contracted with a highly recommended attorney and requested cancellation of removal. 
yet, although their previous attorney was actually a notary public who had committed 
fraud by providing (incorrect) legal advice, federico and gaby were unable to successfully 

3   for this and other vignettes about federico and gaby, see boehm (2016). this excerpt is from pages 43-44 
and 134. 

405

separated families: barriers to family reunification after deportationstop the deportation.4 the many hardships the family would face because of deportation 
were not deemed sufficient to allow the couple to stay in the united states so that all family 
members could remain together in the country. 
according  to  the  ina,5  cancellation  of  removal  for  non-lawful  permanent  residents  is 
possible  only  if  the  individual  has  been  physically  present  in  the  united  states  for  a 
continuous period of not less than 10 years, has been a person of good moral character 
during such period, has not been convicted of an [specified] offense, and, establishes 
that removal would result in exceptional and extremely unusual hardship to the aliens 
spouse, parent, or child, who is a citizen of the united states or an alien lawfully admitted 
for permanent residence. in federico and gabys case, the couples new attorney informed 
them that  despite the many reasons that a cancellation would seem logical and although 
the deportation did indeed create hardship for their children  their particular case was 
not likely to be approved. in order to do so, they would need to prove that their us citizen 
children  faced  exceptional  and  extremely  unusual  hardship,  an  option  that  is  rarely 
attainable (thronson 2015, 37).
and indeed, the rates of successful cancellations of removal corroborate what federicos 
attorney confirmed. the statutory cap is 4,000 per year, and from 2011 through 2015, the 
number  of  cancellations was  on  average  about  one  percent  of  the  number  of  removals 
(eoir 2016, n1; ice 2016).6 federico and gaby undeniably faced hardship due to the 
pending  deportation,  but  in  their  case    like  the  cases  of  so  many  and  therefore  not 
understood to be extremely unusual  the narrow definition of hardship did not account 
for  the  multiple  struggles  that  deportation  in  fact  creates. as  outlined  in  the american 
bar associations report, american justice through immigrants eyes, after the passage 
of iirira, possibilities for relief through a cancellation of removal became even more 
unlikely (aba 2004, 41), again underscoring how the period post-irca, from the 1990s 
to today, has made family unity that much more difficult to achieve.
once  deported,  the  couple  explored  the  possibility  of  requesting  what  federico  called 
a  pardon.  he  contacted  several  immigration  attorneys  to  ask  about  the  likelihood  of 
successfully being granted permission to return, but little came of it. all the lawyers had 
the same read of federico and gabys situation:  authorized return after deportation would 
be nearly impossible. they explained that he could apply for such permission  this would 
require completing and submitting an i-212, application for permission to reapply for 
admission into the united states after deportation or removal  but that such requests 
are not often approved. as the attorneys outlined, the statutory bar would run for 10 years, 
and documented return before that time was very unlikely.
and finally, as i discuss in the following section, federico and gabys case underscores the 
challenges to  and often impossibility of  family reunification for us citizens whose 
parents are deported. all five of federico and gabys children are us citizens, and yet, 
they did not have recourse once they received the removal order unless the children faced 
what the court would deem exceptional and extremely unusual hardship. in other words, 
4   federico did not mention the possibility of a u visa or recount that his attorney considered this.
5   ina  240a(b)(1), 8 u.s.c.  1229(b)(1). 
6   for example, in 2012 when the us government carried out 409,849 removals, 3,787 cancellations of 
removal were granted (eoir 2016, n1; ice 2016).

406

journal on migration and human securitythe fact that five of the seven family members were us citizens was not enough to ensure 
family reunification. indeed, theirs was yet another family sentenced to separation if the 
five us citizens continued to live in their home nation.

penalizing us citizens

case study: cora, joaqun, dina, and leo

when emy and manuel made arrangements for their four children, ranging in age from 
three to 14, to cross the us-mexico border, the childrens safety was their priority. they 
found a respectable coyote, someone they could trust, and they made a substantial payment 
to ensure that the children made it safely to their destination. but this crossing was not 
a  typical  one:  while  most  border  crossings  facilitated  by  guides  involve  movement  of 
unauthorized migrants from mexico to the united states, these children  were us citizens 
who migrated in the other direction, from north to south. 
after emy had been deported, she and manuel decided that it would be best for the children 
to  join  her  in  mexico,  but  because  both  emy  and  manuel  are  undocumented  migrants 
they were unable to easily travel with their children. if manuel accompanied the children 
to mexico, he risked apprehension should he try to cross the border back into the united 
states. similarly, emy was unable to easily enter the united states to meet the children 
there; the stakes of an attempted border crossing were even higher for emy because of 
her recent deportation. so instead the couple hired a coyote, a us citizen, to travel with 
the children, accompany them across the border, and bring them to emy. within a day of 
departing from a border town in texas, the children and emy were reunited, but in mexico 
and without manuel. because the family depended on manuels income, he stayed in the 
united states to continue working and the family was now divided transnationally.
prior to detention and deportation, emy had lived primarily in the united states for a period 
of more than 15 years. when a car accident killed her parents and her brother, emy traveled 
to mexico for the funeral and to support her family. after several months in mexico, she 
decided it was time to go back or return to the united states, so she went to the border, 
intending to cross by land, wading through the rio grande/rio bravo and walking through 
the desert. but when she arrived, the coyotes told her that there had been a change in the 
plans: because of increasing apprehensions along the border in recent days, emy would 
cross with documents supplied by the coyotes, a passport that was valid but belonged to 
someone else. emy told me she was very hesitant to cross that way, but because emy had 
already paid for her passage and was at the border without family or resources, she went 
ahead with the crossing. when attempting to enter the united states, however, her fears 
were actualized: she was stopped and questioned by immigration officials. they found her 
to be inadmissible and transferred her to a federal detention center.  
emys deportation prompted the departure to mexico of her four us citizen children. the 
eldest siblings, teenagers cora and joaqun, had been to mexico as young children, but 
had few memories of their parents home community. the two younger children, dina and 
leo, had never visited mexico, so their transnational border crossing was a first. when i 

407

separated families: barriers to family reunification after deportationspoke with cora several months after her departure from the united states, she still seemed 
stunned by the sudden move. as she described it, one day she was at the mall with friends, 
and by the end of the week, she was in a dusty, rural community in mexicos countryside. 
these children now faced undeniable hardship, though it was not legally defined as such: 
their mothers deportation meant that the children would have to live far from their nation 
and from their home. 
for more than a year, emy and the children lived in mexico while manuel lived in the 
united states. the children, all us citizens, found themselves living in a country that was 
not their own, probably until they were old enough to return to the united states without 
their  parents.  because  of  their  us  citizenship,  the  children  could,  in  principle  at  least, 
return to their country, but in all practical senses, they were confined to mexico until they 
were older or until their parents could make alternative arrangements, presenting a form of 
hardship not addressed by us immigration law.7 
* * *

as  was  the  case  for  federico  and  gabys  five  children,  cora,  joaqun,  dina,  and  leo 
found their family separated by the deportation of a parent, despite their us citizenship 
and despite the fact that they themselves had not been deported  not formally at least. 
for these children, their status as minors meant that they were not yet eligible to petition 
for an immigrant visa for their parents. indeed, except for the possibility of cancellation 
of removal  as discussed, a process that is unlikely and unattainable in most cases of 
deportation  us citizen children have few legal options for relief that might keep their 
families together after deportation. until they are 21 years old, children are not able to 
petition to be reunited with their parents. and, if parents are deported, even this possibility 
at some point in the future becomes extremely unlikely. 
here,  again,  family  reunification  is  characterized  by  barriers  and  limited  options  for 
immigrant families. for this family, hardship took different forms. they were unable to 
structure family life so that all members lived together in the united states, and family 
reunification in mexico would mean no income to support the family. all family members 
faced risks if emy, now deported, and the children tried to return to the united states, and 
they faced certain economic hardship if manuel were to leave his fulltime employment 
in the united states to join the family in mexico. paradoxically, the chain of events that 
resulted in emys deportation was caused by another unconsidered hardship: the death of 
three family members in a tragic car accident. as this case shows, such family separation 
does not only impact noncitizens: deportation has enduring effects on us citizens, especially 
children, even as us citizens would seem to be outside the reach of deportation regimes. 
for some us citizen children, they are separated from primary caregivers as their parents 
disappear  into  detention  or  are  deported  (rabin  2011).  for  other  children,  such  as 
cora, joaqun, dina, and leo, the deportation of a parent results in their own de facto 
deportation (kanstroom 2012, 135). such informal expulsions of us citizens are, for the 
most part, unrecorded and undocumented, as young us citizens find themselves compelled 
to migrate to reunite with family in other countries if they are to continue living with their 
parents (see boehm 2016). some of the challenges us citizen children face stem from 
7   this excerpt is from boehm 2016, pages 45-46, 80.

408

journal on migration and human securitythe tremendous potential for deep conflict as immigration law and family law intersect 
(thronson 2015, 35). other obstacles come from the lack of laws that explicitly outline or 
grant us citizen children the right to maintain family unity after deportation. although the 
best interest of the child is a standard used in family law context, the same standard does 
not guide deportation proceedings, a point that underscores the multiple barriers to family 
unification after deportation.
for  us  citizen  childrenindeed  for  children  regardless  of  citizenship  or  immigration 
statusthe path to family reunification is a difficult or impossible one when a parent is 
deported. the fact that in 2012 there were 4.5 million us-born children whose parents 
were unauthorized (passel and cohn 2015) shows how widespread family separation after 
deportation is or is likely to become. emys children expressed frustration that their options 
were to live in mexico, far from their country of origin and their home, or live in the united 
states without their mother there to care for them. the bind these children face underscores 
what jacqueline bhabha (2014, 19) aptly calls the elusive right to family life. as parents 
and other family members are deported from the united states, us citizen children and 
youth increasingly find themselves unable to maintain family in any meaningful way.

no path to authorized return

case study: jaime

just  before  he  was  deported,  while  still  at  a  federal  detention  center,  immigration  and 
customs enforcement agents brought jaime the clothes he had been wearing the night he 
was arrested several months earlier. after a childhood and life of more than 15 years in the 
united states, jaime had only this small ziplock bag with a few possessions. three months 
in a county jail in rural colorado, followed by several weeks at a federal detention center, 
had been demoralizing. arrested just after his 18th birthday, jaime admitted that jail was 
quite frightening at first, but he soon learned the ropes and kept his head down: you let 
people do their thing, and you just do yours. 
jaime  whom his aunt described as a good kid who made a mistake  was deported 
to mexico. he had migrated as a toddler, and although he was an unauthorized migrant in 
the united states, his day-to-day life as a teenager was much like that of his us citizen 
peers: he worked part-time, socialized with friends on the weekends, and had a steady 
girlfriend. but that abruptly changed when he was detained. after jaime and some friends 
were stopped by police officers and cited for having open containers of alcohol in their 
vehicle, their paths went in notably different directions. jaimes friends, us citizens, were 
arrested, quickly released, and ordered by the court to complete community service. in 
contrast, jaimes life took a jarring turn.
jaime chose to go before an immigration judge without legal representation. he had met 
with an attorney prior to the hearing, but the attorney said that there were no legal options 
available    that  deportation  was  likely    and  so  he  advised  jaime  and  his  family  to 
save the money they would spend on legal services. during the immigration hearing, the 
judge  asked  if  he  had  any  family  members  who  were  from  the  united  states.  feeling 

409

separated families: barriers to family reunification after deportationhopeful, jaime mentioned his two siblings who are us citizens. no, the judge clarified, 
do you have any immediate family members who are us citizens? the judge explained 
that by immediate family members, he meant parents, children, or a spouse. the judge 
just reads you your rights and then he asks, are you married to a citizen? no. do you 
have any citizen kids? no. are your parents citizens? i said, no. well, then, said the 
judge. i cant do anything for you. you have to leave. and thats it. jaime recounted how 
people who did have us citizen family members  what he described as the right family 
members, that is, parents, a spouse, or children  were assigned another court date, and 
the people who did not, well, thats it. 
so, after months in prison and federal immigration detention, jaime found himself in rural 
mexico, a place he could not remember and did not identify as home. upon repatriation 
to his hometown, jaime had no memories of mexico to draw upon. for jaime, life and 
lifes recollections began in el norte. although he was reunited with his grandmothers and 
extended family members in mexico, he was very far from the family members he was 
close to, including his parents, siblings, girlfriend, and peers  the family and friends who 
had provided support in his day-to-day life. within a matter of months after being caught 
up in deportation proceedings, jaimes kin and social networks were upended, presenting a 
kind of hardship that was unimaginable prior to his return.
shortly after he arrived in mexico, jaime started to consider the possibility of returning to 
the united states. the long-distance relationship with his girlfriend was challenging, he 
wasnt able to have much contact with his friends, and he missed his family tremendously. 
after just a few months in mexico, and in consultation with his parents and siblings, jaime 
decided to again migrate north. jaime told me that he was unhappy: he missed his family, 
could not get used to being in mexico, and did not, he felt, fit in. and so, he went home, 
back to the united states and back to the only life he had ever really known.8 

* * *

jaimes experience as he moved through various legal systems and after his deportation 
to mexico show some of the ways that family ties are typically not enough to reverse a 
deportation or to bolster a request for return after removal. as his conversation with the 
judge during his hearing demonstrates, for jaime, his immediate family members who 
were us citizens  namely two of his siblings  were not relatives who could have 
strengthened his claim for cancellation of removal. when jaime explained that his parents 
were not us citizens, and that he did not have a spouse or children, the judge issued a 
deportation order and jaime was removed. 
after being deported to mexico, jaime was living far from those he identified as close or 
immediate family, even though the us government did not define them as such for the 
purposes of canceling a removal order. jaime lamented that he did not have the right 
family member to cancel the deportation, and indeed, as david b. thronson (2007, 66) 
writes, [a] close family member with legal immigration or citizenship status does not 
guarantee that immigrants in mixed status families will achieve legal immigration status 
themselves.  for  jaime,  hardship  came  directly  out  of  his  separation  from  immediate 

8    jaimes  deportation  is  described  throughout  boehm  (2016). the  vignette  here  is  a  compilation  of  his 
experiences from pages 38-39, 89, 97-98, 139-40.

410

journal on migration and human securityfamily, as he faced isolation, disorientation, and a future life in mexico that was difficult to 
imagine or take steps toward fulfilling. here, legal definitions of hardship and family 
did not overlap with jaimes own understandings of family members and the challenges he 
experienced.
for jaime, future options for family reunification through formal channels seemed extremely 
unlikely. after moving through both the criminal and immigration justice systems, jaime 
was not hopeful that legal possibilities for return would come to fruition. and, his intuition 
was probably correct. the unlikelihood of jaime being given a second chance  whether 
through a petition for admission after deportation, such as the relief that federico and gaby 
hoped for, or by way of a successful tourist visa application after living a decade in mexico 
 meant that jaimes options were very limited. in this context, his decision to return to 
the united states without authorization was likely the only way he would be able to return 
at all. and, yet, in doing so he triggered a permanent bar,9 thereby eliminating legal options 
for return in the future.
jaimes case  and indeed all the cases i have described here  demonstrates the many 
barriers  to  family  reunification  after  deportation  and  the  multiple  forms  of  individual 
and family hardship that come in deportations wake. regardless of the impetus for or 
conditions of the deportation, or the ties that individuals have to us citizens and the nation, 
the opportunities for family reunification in the united states and future return through 
legal channels are very limited. even when trying to follow the law, as was the case for 
federico and gaby, there are few or no options. and, for those who have come into contact 
with law enforcement, regardless of the conditions or specifics of the case  such as the 
open container violation that resulted in jaimes deportation but did not result in prison 
time for the us citizens involved  authorized return can be an impossibility in every 
practical way. 
during jaimes immigration hearing, the judge reminded him of his 10-year bar from the 
united states as the result of his deportation and encouraged him to wait out the time in 
mexico. but jaime was doubtful that any visa would be approved for him even after a decade 
had  passed. and  so,  faced  with  few  possibilities  for  returning  with  state  authorization, 
jaime decided to migrate without documents despite the high stakes in doing so. it was the 
only way he could ensure that he would be with his family once more.

policy recommendations
faced with the challenges of keeping or bringing families together, families affected by 
deportation  find  themselves  divided,  living  across  borders,  with  mixed  statuses  within 
families, living together but with the fear of imminent separation, and/or with few or no 
possibilities for a change in immigration status. a primary recommendation, therefore, is to 
create policies with enough flexibility to facilitate family unity in the united states. strong 
policies should acknowledge  and support  the wide variety of family experiences 
and the diverse ways that families are structured and made meaningful. if such options 
are not possible for immigrants and their families, the rigidity of the current system is 
 
9   ina  212 (a)(9)(a), 8 u.s.c. 1182(a)(9)(a). 

411

separated families: barriers to family reunification after deportationlikely to result in ongoing if not increased unauthorized migration, as families strive to 
come together across borders after deportation, even if they must do so through informal 
channels.
thus, future comprehensive immigration policy reform should be attentive to family ties 
and the profound hardship that comes from family separation. first, a focus on maintaining 
family ties  rather than severing them  is policy that will strengthen both human and 
national security (kerwin 2016). second, a justice system that does not consider family or 
does not have the flexibility to acknowledge different family relations and their importance 
only perpetuates injustice, presenting rule of law concerns (kanstroom 2012, 89) and 
threatening us compliance with human rights law (thronson 2016). and, finally, from a 
humanitarian perspective, the nation should consider its role in contributing to this large-
scale crisis. when families are separated by us immigration law, the result is a humanitarian 
crisis that is, in large part, of our own making. indeed, humanitarian crises and efforts to 
address them are always embedded within political motivations and debates (e.g., fassin 
2007; fassin 2013; ticktin 2014). while policymakers and members of the public often 
frame  unauthorized  immigration  as  the  product  of  individual  choice  and  action,  such 
logic is not tenable in the current climate. today, millions of families  whose members 
have a variety of immigration statuses, including us citizenship  are impacted by us 
immigration laws and an absence of sound policies. 

relief, flexibility, and the possibility for exceptions

a first step  and one that could be implemented through both administrative and legislative 
channels    is  to  make  the  possibility  for  relief  more  robust.  such  options  could  take 
different forms, and might include an expansion of the opportunities for exceptions, appeals, 
or  pardons,  and  a  mechanism  for  a  meaningful  review  of  the  particular  circumstances 
of a deportation. for example, relief through a u visa might have been a possibility for 
federico and gaby as victims of a crime. or, for young people, such as jaime, who have 
lived the majority of their lives in the united states, there should be some option outside 
of deportation. in the three cases discussed above, migrants faced penalties that would not 
likely match the crime in any other aspect of the us justice system.10 
indeed,  the  [e]limination  of  discretionary  relief  means  factors  that  weigh  against 
an  individuals  deportation  are  now  ignored  (aba  2004,  4).  jason  cade  (2015,  37-
38)  suggests  that  revisiting  judicial  recommendation  against  deportation  (jrad) 
might provide one such possibility for relief and could point the way to an important 
administrative  reform  that  would  decrease  the  likelihood  of  unjustified  removals. the 
reality is that the experiences of individuals, the circumstances of their removal orders, and 
their family relations are particular, nuanced, and complicated. reasonable immigration 
legislation needs to include flexibility, some possibility for alternative outcomes, and a way 
to account for the many different circumstances that shape unauthorized presence in the 
united states. shouldnt federico and gaby, upstanding members of the community who 
lived in the united states for decades, have five us citizen children, and were victims of a 
crime themselves, be given some possibility for relief? 

10   see discussion in cade (2015, 36-37).

412

journal on migration and human securitythe rights of us citizens

in addition, future immigration policy reform should expand options for family reunification 
when us citizens are affected. current legislation does not consider  or at least does 
not adequately recognize  the millions of us citizens with parents who are deported 
or at risk of being so. for us citizen children, the deportation of a parent can essentially 
[destroy] their right to live in an intact family (thronson 2007, 80). here, us citizenship is 
compromised through relations with others, resulting in a form of contingent citizenship 
for those whose parents, partners, siblings, or other relatives are unauthorized migrants 
(boehm  2011).  for  example,  future  legislation  could  expand  definitions  of  hardship, 
remove  limiting  adjectives  like  exceptional  to  consider  factors  such  as  us  citizen 
childrens right to live with their parents, and utilize the best interest of the child standard 
in immigration and deportation proceedings. such steps could have potentially provided 
relief to federico and gaby and their children, as well as emy and manuels family. dont 
manuel and emys children  all us citizens  have the right to live with their parents 
in their country of origin?

a path to authorized return

and, just as immigrant advocates have argued that a path to citizenship should be part of 
immigration reform, so, too, should there be a path to authorized return after deportation. 
although possible in theory  after living outside the united states for the full duration 
of time barred from the country or through the possibility of a petition for reentry  the 
reality is that authorized migration post-removal is unlikely. the full effect of a record 
number of deportations in recent decades is still unfolding. the range of consequences 
of policies that shut people out of the united states indefinitely, even when they are in 
every meaningful way members of the nation, is difficult to predict. one point is certain: 
current statutes  and the absence of immigration reform  create hardship for families 
that cannot be overstated. families are, more often than not, altered indefinitely after the 
deportation of a loved one. shouldnt it be possible for jaime, raised in the united states 
after arriving as a toddler, to return to his de facto home nation at some point in the future? 

* * *

to address this humanitarian crisis  a crisis that separates families and keeps them apart 
for years, decades, or indefinitely  an alternative approach is needed. given the many 
barriers, struggles, and difficulties families face because of deportation, comprehensive 
immigration  reform  that  acknowledges  individuals  as  embedded  in  families  is  crucial. 
as thronson  (2015,  33)  argues,  despite  the  ubiquitous  yet  inaccurate  impression  that 
the promotion of family unity is a key value underlying immigration law . . . distain for 
family unity . . . is evident in the failure of immigration law. indeed, we must find ways 
to keep mixed-status us families intact (warren and kerwin 2017, 7), and to provide 
opportunities for families to reunite when removal results in separation and division across 
borders.
deportation can be a kind of life sentence for individuals who have been deported, but also 
for their family members. given that [f]amily life that spans international borders still 
abuts against the states exclusionary prerogative (bhabha 2014, 25), the expulsion of 

413

separated families: barriers to family reunification after deportationimmigrants divides them from loved ones in ways that may never be remedied. currently, 
deportation is more often than not a dead end for familiesa place from which there is no 
out, no hope, and no possibilities for return to the united states. finding rational and just 
options that can in fact keep families together has never been more urgent.
 

