another story: what public 
opinion data tell us about 
refugee and humanitarian policy

brad blitz 
middlesex university and london school of economics

executive summary
the  global  reaction  to  us  president  donald  trumps  executive  order, 
protecting  the  nation  from  foreign  terrorist  entry  into  the  united 
states of january 27, 2017,1 revealed great public sympathy for the fate 
of refugees and the principle of refugee protection. in the case of europe, 
such sympathy has, however, been dismissed by politicians who have read 
concerns  regarding  security  and  integration  as  reason  for  introducing 
restrictive  policies  on  asylum  and  humanitarian  assistance.  these 
policies are at odds with public sentiment. drawing upon public opinion 
surveys conducted by amnesty international, the european social survey 
(ess), and pew global attitudes survey across the european union and 
neighboring  states,  this  article  records  a  marked  divide  between  public 
attitudes  towards  the  treatment  of  refugees  and  asylum  seekers  and 
official policies regarding asylum and humanitarian assistance, and seeks 
to understand why this is the case. 
the  article  suggests  that  post-9/11  there  has  been  a  reconfiguration  of 
refugee policy and a reconnecting of humanitarian and security interests 
which  has  enabled  a  discourse  antithetical  to  the  universal  right  to 
asylum.  it  offers  five  possible  explanations  for  this  trend:  i)  fears  over 
cultural antagonism in host countries; ii) the conflation of refugees and 
immigrants, both those deemed economically advantageous as well as those 
labelled as illegal; iii) dominance of human capital thinking; iv) foreign 
policy justification; and v) the normalization of border controls. the main 
conclusion is that in a post-post-cold war era characterized in part by the 
reconnecting of security and humanitarian policy, european governments 
have developed restrictive policies despite public sympathy. support for 
the  admission  of  refugees  is  not,  however,  unqualified,  and  most  states 
and  european  populations  prefer  skilled  populations  that  can  be  easily 
assimilated. in order to achieve greater protection and more open policies, 
this article recommends human rights actors work with the united nations 
high commissioner for refugees (unhcr) and its partners to challenge 
the above discourse through media campaigns and grassroots messaging. 

1   protecting the nation from foreign terrorist entry into the united states, exec. order no. 13769, 82 fed. 
reg. 8977 (jan. 27, 2017).

 2017 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 5 number 2 (2017): 379-400further recommendations include:
  challenging efforts to normalize and drawing attention to the extreme 
and  unprecedented  activities  of  illegal  and  inhumane  practices,  e.g., 
detention, offshore processing, and the separation of families through 
the courts as part of a coordinated information campaign to present a 
counter moral argument. 

  identifying how restrictive asylum policies fail to advance foreign policy 

interests and are contrary to international law. 

  evidencing  persecution  by  sharing  information  with  the  press  and 
government  agencies  on  the  nature  of  claims  by  those  currently 
considered ineligible for refugee protection as part of a wider campaign 
of information and inclusion.

  engaging  with  minority,  and  in  particular  muslim,  communities  to 
redress public concerns regarding the possibility of cultural integration 
in the host country. 

  clarifying the rights of refugees and migrants in line with the unhcr 
and  international  organization  for  migration  (iom)  guidelines  and 
european  and  national  law  in order  to  hold  governments  to  account 
and to ensure that all  irrespective of their skills, status, nationality 
or religion  are given the opportunity to seek asylum.

  identifying and promoting leadership among states and regional bodies 

to advance the rights of refugees.

introduction
the  global  reaction  to  us  president  donald  trumps  executive  order,  protecting  the 
nation from foreign terrorist entry into the united states of january 27, 2017,2 revealed 
great public sympathy to the fate of refugees and the principle of refugee protection more 
generally. demonstrations in the united states were accompanied by european protests and 
demands that the uk prime minister theresa may explicitly condemn the muslim ban 
(house of commons 2017a). these protests were also accompanied by acts of hospitality 
where both british and other europeans opened up their homes to those affected by the ban 
who were caught in transit. such expressions of solidarity were not new. throughout the 
refugee crisis of 2015-2016, large sections of european society showed their support for 
a more humane and effective response from their governments through charitable acts and 
public outcry. in addition to solidarity campaigns and direct assistance to migrants arriving 
onto  european  soil,  public  opinion  was  occasionally  reflected  in  successful  advocacy 
efforts. for example, following much pressure from calais solidarity groups, the 2016 uk 
immigration act was amended further to the dubs amendment3 which called upon the 
uk government to relocate unaccompanied children from european countries. 
2   id.
3   immigration act 2016, c. 19,  67 (eng.). 

380

journal on migration and human securityduring this period, in spite of public support, european governments introduced many 
restrictions to curb arrivals in the name of both border management and the preservation 
of national sovereignty. most notably, in february 2017, the uk government cancelled 
the dubs relocation scheme which was to be capped at just 350 unaccompanied children 
admitted to the uk (house of commons 2017b). 
this article reviews the development of european asylum and humanitarian policy and 
the  public  response  to  growing  restrictions  against  the  right  to  asylum.  drawing  upon 
public opinion surveys conducted across the european union and neighboring states on 
either side of the peak of the 2015 refugee crisis  the amnesty international refugees 
welcome index (amnesty 2016), the european social survey (ess 2016), and the pew 
global attitudes survey (pew 2016)  this article argues that there has been a marked 
divide between public attitudes towards the treatment of refugees and asylum seekers and 
official policies regarding asylum and humanitarian assistance. this article seeks to explain 
the reasons for the above discord.
the first part of the article provides a brief review of the historical context for the development 
of  contemporary  national  and  eu  policies  on  asylum  management  and  humanitarian 
assistance.  noting  how  cold war  security  interests  eventually  became  decoupled  from 
humanitarian  policy  in  the  1990s,  this  article  describes  how  security  interests  were 
reinserted in the formulation of humanitarian policy during the past decade. the second 
part then presents public opinion data from multiple sources to reveal a noticeable discord 
between sections of the european public and their political leaders. drawing upon data 
collected on either side of the peak in the refugee crisis, that is, before and after april 
2015,  this  article  assesses  their  reliability  as  evidence  of  european  sympathy  for  more 
open refugee and asylum policies before offering some explanations for the divide between 
recorded public opinion and the direction of national policies on asylum and humanitarian 
assistance. 
the central argument of this paper is that, following 9/11, there has been a reconfiguration of 
refugee policy and a reconnecting of humanitarian and security interests which has enabled 
a discourse antithetical to the universal right to asylum. it offers five possible explanations 
for this shift: 1) refugees are often perceived and treated as immigrants, irrespective of 
their claims of persecution; 2) western states have expressed vocal fears that refugees may 
not integrate but rather antagonize cultural sensitivities in host countries; 3) the refugee 
regime is being undermined by a shift towards a human capital logic which favors skilled 
individuals; 4) the control on asylum is informed by foreign policy justifications; and 5) 
the use of border controls and prevalence of border management discourse is undermining 
concerns regarding protection. the main conclusion of this paper is that in a post-post-
cold war era characterized in part by the reconnecting of security and humanitarian policy, 
european governments have developed restrictive policies in spite of widespread public 
sympathy  for  refugees  and  asylum  seekers.  furthermore,  refugee-receiving  states  have 
expressed clear p