prospects for responsibility 
sharing in the refugee context

volker trk
office of the united nations high commissioner for refugees (unhcr)

executive summary
the current state of forced displacement today, with record numbers and 
rising levels of need, poses challenges of a scope and complexity that we have 
not had to face since the second world war. yet, if we make every effort 
to place refugee protection at the heart of our response, these challenges 
are not insurmountable. the international refugee regime provides us with 
tried and tested tools to address them. what is needed now is to put our 
collective resources and capacities to their most effective use. we are already 
seeing this in the recent move towards creating a proposed global compact 
on responsibility sharing for refugees, as set out in the un secretary-
generals report, in safety and dignity: addressing large movements of 
refugees and migrants. we are also seeing this with innovative directions 
in protection, assistance, and solutions for refugees that are helping us to 
operationalize long-standing principles of protection, transforming them 
into  tangible  results  for  refugees.  new  forms  of  group  determination, 
combined with community-based protection and other measures, can help 
to ensure an appropriate legal status while at the same time identifying 
specific  protection  needs.  protection  strategies  can  inform  frameworks 
for  governing  migration  and  meeting  the  needs  of  the  most  vulnerable 
migrants. the integration of services to refugees within national systems 
and the expansion of cash-based programming can meet essential needs for 
assistance more effectively. finally, the humanitarian-development nexus, 
the progressive realization of rights  including the right to work, and 
the creation of complementary pathways for admission  can provide the 
building blocks for achieving longer-term solutions, which remain, as ever, 
the ultimate aspiration of the international refugee protection regime.

i. introduction
human mobility is increasingly defined by forced displacement in todays world. conflicts 
not only persist, but also proliferate, often compounded by environmental degradation and 
food insecurity, driving growing numbers of people from their homes and communities. 
now more than 65.3 million people are forcibly displaced, of whom nearly two-thirds are 
displaced internally and one-third across state borders.1 more than half of the refugees 
1  including  3.2  million  asylum  seekers,  21.3  million  refugees,  40.8  million  internally  displaced  persons 
(mostly in colombia, syria, iraq, and yemen, as well as in the lake chad basin and south sudan), and an 
estimated 10 million stateless persons (unhcr 2016a).

 2016 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 4 number 3 (2016): 45-59in  the  world  today  have  fled  from  syria, afghanistan,  or  somalia.  pressures  are  rising 
in countries in the immediate regions surrounding conflicts where 90 percent of all the 
worlds refugees are hosted, with turkey, pakistan, lebanon, iran, and ethiopia receiving 
the largest numbers of refugees. multiple displacement has become a regular feature in 
the experience of flight, as refugees are compelled to move from one place to another in 
search of a community sufficiently equipped to receive them. hence, the pressures are 
also mounting on countries further afield, as some refugees move onward across seas and 
deserts, hoping to find safety and solutions and to reunite with family members. germany 
and the united states of america, for example, received the highest number of asylum 
applications in 2015 (unhcr 2016a).
reactions by host communities in the face of growing numbers and the commensurate rising 
levels of need have been mixed. while there have been demonstrations of overwhelming 
generosity  and  volunteerism  by  many  sectors  of  civil  society,  this  has  been  tempered 
somewhat by expressions of fear, manifested in xenophobic attacks, pushbacks, the erection 
of walls and fences, and restrictions on entry and access to asylum. these unwelcoming 
efforts often drive refugees into the hands of smugglers and traffickers. the situation is not 
tenable either for the protection of refugees or for the stability and cohesiveness of host 
communities. with 24 persons now displaced every minute, it is clear that maintaining the 
status quo is no longer an option. the international community needs to find approaches 
that go beyond business-as-usual, yet at the same time remain centered on the principles of 
protection at the heart of the international refugee regime. 
this paper focuses on new or emerging approaches in the areas of responsibility sharing 
 with regard to protection, assistance, and solutions  that may offer hope for the future, 
as they can more effectively translate long-standing principles of refugee protection into 
concrete and meaningful action. section ii examines the legal and practical foundations 
for possible future arrangements on responsibility sharing. section iii proposes ways that 
protection and asylum systems can be strengthened to ensure that the principles enshrined 
in international refugee law can be upheld in the face of both mixed movements of refugees 
and vulnerable migrants and increasing security concerns. in section iv, the paper considers 
future directions in assistance for refugees, highlighting the opportunities for protection 
and solutions that may be found through embedding services to refugees within national 
systems  as  well  as  through  cash-based  programming.  section v  explores  prospects  for 
facilitating solutions through linking the humanitarian and development sectors, facilitating 
the right to work, and expanding complementary pathways for admission. finally, section 
vi summarizes the articles recommendations and provides a few concluding thoughts.

ii. sharing responsibility for refugees
in the face of rapidly shrinking protection space, it is imperative that we find ways to 
safeguard  the  institution  of  asylum  while  responding  to  the  concerns  raised  by  states. 
current  failures  to  ensure  access  to  and  the  quality  of  asylum  have  been  attributed  to 
perceived shortcomings in the 1951 convention and its 1967 protocol,2 leading some to
2  convention relating to the status of refugees (geneva, 28 july 1951) 189 u.n.t.s. 137, entered into force 
22 april 1954. http://www.refworld.org/docid/3be01b964.html; protocol relating to the status of refugees 
(new  york,  31  jan.  1967)  606  u.n.t.s.  267,  entered  into  force  4  oct.  1967.  http://www.refworld.org/
docid/3ae6b3ae4.html (hereinafter referred to as the [1951] convention and its [1967] protocol).

46

journal on migration and human securitycall for revisiting its parameters and scope. there are certain risks in such an exercise, as 
reopening this discussion could inadvertently result in many of the hard-won advances 
made in negotiating international refugee protection being undermined. it would also be 
an exercise that would not address the deeper issue, which is not the convention itself, 
but the failure of political will  both to abide by or fully implement the convention in 
the face of populist opposition arising out of fear, misinformation, and xenophobia, and to 
address more concertedly the root causes of displacement. principled leadership is urgently 
required to counter damaging narratives that harm both refugees as well as the institution 
of asylum itself at a time when it is needed more than ever before.
the 1951 convention was crafted 65 years ago as both a moral and legal response to people 
who were fleeing their countries for many of the same reasons people are fleeing today  
and in even larger numbers. it has been applied successfully over the years in situations 
of mass influx to ensure admission to territory and protection on a group basis or through 
accelerated procedures, and it is equally well positioned to do so today. it was designed 
from  the  start  to  protect  individuals  at  risk  for  a  variety  of  reasons,  including  persons 
fleeing armed conflict and other situations of violence that may accompany changes in 
political systems. it does not distinguish between refugees fleeing from situations of war 
or peace, and it recognizes that persons fleeing situations of armed conflict or violence 
may well fear persecution on the basis of one or more of the convention grounds (see 
unhcr 2012a). the application of the convention has evolved to address modern forms 
of  persecution,  such  as  those  related  to  gender,  sexual  orientation,  children,  and  gang-
related violence. it can also accommodate new approaches to large-scale movements such 
as the strategic use of refugee status determination or temporary protection in the immediate 
term, complemented by community-based protection approaches to identify individuals 
with specific needs, such as unaccompanied or separated children, survivors of sexual and 
gender-based violence, or victims of trafficking.
it  is  an  ironic  turn  of  events  that  some  of  the  countries  that  so  greatly  benefited  from 
refugee protection in the past following the adoption of the 1951 convention, are the same 
ones now closing their borders. the need to find more effective ways to implement the 
1951 convention to protect persons from persecution has clearly become more pressing 
than ever. the 1951 convention and its 1967 protocol, complemented now by regional 
instruments and customary law, are still widely acknowledged as the main legal tool that 
we have at hand for saving lives. it is not something that we can risk losing at such a critical 
juncture. as we have seen so many times in recent years, departures from the fundamental 
principles  of  international  refugee  protection  have  neither  reduced  nor  stalled  refugee 
movements. rather, they have resulted in ineffective management of large-scale influxes, 
the diversion of refugee movements, the creation of tensions between states as burdens and 
costs are shifted from some onto others, and ultimately the revictimization of those most in 
need of protection and support. 
these  challenges  invite  us  to  consider  how  we  might  approach  this  differently    to 
ensure both that refugees are able to access and enjoy asylum, and that the countries most 
affected by refugee movements can count upon international support. the provisions for 
the reception and treatment of refugees are set out clearly within the 1951 convention 
and its 1967 protocol, but compliance with these provisions is inconsistent, and gaps in 

47

prospects for responsibility sharingimplementation create practical problems that may lead refugees to move onward. also, 
if more states acceded to, and implemented fully, the 1951 convention and other refugee 
law  instruments,  then  it  may  be  possible  to  realize  more  widely  shared  and  consistent 
approaches to asylum and refugee protection. 
the importance of international cooperation and responsibility sharing likewise has been 
recognized in various iterations, from the charter of the united nations,3 to the preamble to 
the 1951 convention, united nations general assembly resolutions,4 and conclusions of 
the unhcr executive committee.5 at the regional level, many states have also committed 
to share responsibility under regional instruments and laws in africa, asia, latin america, 
and europe.6 the question we are faced with now is how we move from principle to practice 
 to translate the concept of responsibility sharing into concrete practical commitments.
since the inception of the united nations, the international community has come together 
many  times  to  find  solutions  for  refugee  situations  on  every  major  continent.7 yet,  we 
have  always  had  to  reinvent  our  responses  anew. the  scale  and  complexity of  refugee 
movements  today  have  brought  to  the  fore  the  need  for  making  such  responses  more 
predictable, systematic, and equitable. sharing responsibility can help alleviate tensions 
between states and mitigate against potential negative consequences for refugees. it can also 
ensure that states are able to respond to refugees more effectively. in the current context, 
the provisions of the 1951 convention could be supplemented with additional agreements 
amongst states on responsibility-sharing arrangements, defining when such arrangements 
would be needed, articulating measures that would be taken, and setting out a framework 
for states to contribute in line with their capacities and to receive support according to 
their levels of need (see trk and garlick 2016). in recognition of this, the un secretary-
generals  report,  in  safety  and  dignity: addressing  large  movements  of  refugees  and 
migrants, calls for global commitments to uphold safety and dignity in large movements of 
refugees and migrants through both a proposed global compact on responsibility sharing 

3   charter of the united nations (san francisco, 26 june 1945) 1 u.n.t.s xvi, entered into force 24 oct. 
1945, art. 1(3), 55, 56. http://www.refworld.org/docid/3ae6b3930.html.
4    see,  for  example,  united  nations  general  assembly  (unga)  resolution  on  the  united  nations 
millennium declaration, u.n. doc. a/res/55/2 (2000); unga resolution on promotion of a democratic 
and equitable international order, u.n. doc. a/res/56/151 (2001); unga resolution on the promotion of 
a democratic and equitable international order, u.n. doc. a/res/57/213. (2002); and unga resolution on 
the promotion of a democratic and equitable international order, u.n. doc. a/res/59/193. (2004).
5   see, for example, unhcr executive committee (excom) conclusions no. 89(li) (2000), 11(xxix) 
(1978), 22 (xxxii)  (1981), 52(xxxix)  (1998), 15(xxx)  (1979), 77(xlvi) (1995), 79(xlvii) (1996), 
80(xlvii) (1996), and 85(xlix) (1998).
6   see, for example, the organization of african unity (oau) convention governing the specific aspects of 
refugee problems in africa (10 september 1969) 1001 u.n.t.s. 45; and the organization of american states 
(oas) cartagena declaration on refugees (1984), oas/ser.l/v/ii.6, doc. 10, rev. 1, 190-93.
7   for example, in resettling hungarian refugees in the late 1950s, convening the international conferences 
on  assistance  to  refugees  in  africa  i  and  ii,  implementing  the  comprehensive  plan  of  action  in  the 
indochinese crisis, and convening the international conference on central american refugees. in the past 
two  decades,  international  cooperation  was  mobilized  through  the  global  consultations;  the agenda  for 
protection (unhcr 2003); the 2007 iraq conference; and the refugee and resilience response plans for 
the syria and south sudanese situations, as well as the 2014 brazil declaration and plan of action; the 2015 
49th mercado comn del sur (mercosur, southern common market) summit; the bali process; and 
the 2016 lake chad regional protection dialogue.

48

journal on migration and human securityfor refugees, and a proposed global compact for safe, orderly, and regular migration 
(un secretary-general 2016). 
the proposed global compact on responsibility sharing for refugees, as envisioned in 
the secretary-generals report, would be the centerpiece of humanitarian action for future 
engagement in mass influx situations as well as in situations of protracted displacement. 
it would be a commitment by states to better share responsibility for refugees based upon 
existing legal obligations and normative frameworks and would draw upon best practices 
and our wealth of experiences from the past. it would promote more equitable participation 
in a comprehensive refugee response to alleviate some of the pressures on states hosting 
the largest numbers of refugees. it would also provide a framework for addressing root 
causes and planning for solutions from the outset of an emergency. unhcr would be 
called upon to initiate and develop a comprehensive refugee response whenever there is 
a large-scale influx, working closely with states, partners, and civil society. this whole-
of-society approach would help garner public support and build the momentum needed 
for states to commit to and invest in admission, protection, assistance, solutions, and host 
community support.

iii. upholding obligations to protect refugees
despite the enduring nature of the 1951 convention and the prospects for upholding it 
through  new  commitments  to  share  responsibility,  some  have  questioned  whether  the 
convention  is  fully  equipped  to  deal  with  modern  realities  of  mixed  movements  and 
security  concerns,  particularly  those  related  to  human  smuggling  and  trafficking.  this 
article next addresses in turn each of these concerns. it outlines what the convention and its 
1967 protocol have to offer in each of these respects, as living instruments that have proven 
to be adaptable to changing circumstances over time (see trk and nicholson 2003), and 
suggests proposals for strengthening our responses to these issues in ways that complement 
rather than undermine the convention. 

a. responding to protection needs in mixed movements

the complexities and growth in mixed movements of refugees and migrants demand that 
we find ways to ensure that the human rights of all people on the move are respected, 
protected, and fulfilled. refugees will not be able to return home or enjoy protection in 
their  country  of  origin. as  such,  the  specific  international  regime  developed  to  protect 
them ensures that they are not forcibly returned to their countries of origin or penalized for 
unauthorized entry or stay. when refugees are included under the category of migrants, this 
obscures the specific protections that refugees require. 
at the same time, while refugees and migrants have different legal statuses and international 
protection needs, many of their immediate needs for safe travel, protection from smugglers 
and traffickers,8 dignified reception and shelter, protection from xenophobia and racism, 
humane treatment, and support for basic needs are the same. in addition to the international 

international 

in  particular 
8   
two  protocols 
the  palermo  convention  (united  nations  convention  against  transnational 
organized  crime  [new  york,  15  nov.  2000]  un  doc.  a/55/383,  entered  into  force  29.  sept.  2003.

instruments  addressing  smuggling  and 

to 

trafficking 

in  persons, 

49

prospects for responsibility sharingprotection regime, we therefore need to find ways to improve the governance of international 
migration.  we  can  draw  upon  principles  and  lessons  learned  in  the  refugee  protection 
regime to help inform the process. this is essential for ensuring that for individuals who 
are at risk, but who may not fall within the definition of a refugee, responses are appropriate 
and  respect  their  human  rights  and  dignity.  some  individuals,  such  as  unaccompanied 
children, victims of trafficking, or stateless persons, will have specific needs for assistance 
and  protection  regardless  of  whether  they  also  have  a  claim  for  refugee  status.  such 
responses could include expanded pathways for safe and regular migration, frameworks 
for protecting human rights of people on the move, and proactive planning to address new 
forms of displacement related to climate change. 
climate change-induced displacement, causing some 26.4 million people to leave their 
homes each year (idmc 2016), is one area in particular where there is strong potential for 
complementary responses at the international level, particularly with regard to cross-border 
protection. the vast majority of persons of concern to unhcr live in climate change 
hotspots around the world. the salience of displacement as an aspect of climate change 
was recognized in the agenda for the protection of cross-border displaced persons in 
the context of disasters and climate change, endorsed by 110 countries at the nansen 
initiative global consultation in october 2015 (nansen initiative 2015), the platform on 
disaster displacement,9 as well as in the climate change agreement in paris at cop 21,10 
which created a task force to develop recommendations to address this issue. this task 
force will be an important forum for sharing research and analysis, strengthening national 
and regional coordination, sharing best practices and guidance, and integrating climate 
change adaptation and displacement considerations into disaster risk reduction strategies. 
unhcr will lend its protection experience and legal expertise to these efforts, both to 
help analyze the causes of displacement, to better understand the link between conflict and 
environmental degradation, and to define and respond to the specific categories of people 
on the move. towards this end, unhcr is commissioning a study on the protection of 
people fleeing disasters and events related to the adverse effects of climate change. 
while solutions to the plights of refugees and migrants will often be quite different, they 
can be better achieved through cooperation and commitment to meet the needs of both.  

http://www.refworld.org/docid/3b00f55b0.html),  include  provisions  relating  to  the  rights  of  migrants 
and  refugees.  both  protocols  also  include  savings  clauses  requiring  that  law  enforcement  measures  be 
consistent with other rights, obligations, and responsibilities under international law, including international 
humanitarian, human rights, and refugee law, especially with respect to the principle of non-refoulement.
9   the platform on disaster displacement was created to follow up on the nansen initiative and implement 
the recommendations of the protection agenda, to better prepare for displacement and respond to situations 
when people are forced to find refuge within their own country or across a border. it will constitute a multi-
stakeholder forum for dialogue, information sharing, and policy and normative development. 
10   on december 12, 2015, the united nations framework convention on climate change (unfccc) 21st 
conference of parties (cop 21) in paris adopted the paris agreement to limit greenhouse gas emissions and 
establish bases for a new international climate regime, including the creation of a task force on displacement 
(un framework convention on climate change, fccc/cp/2015/l.9/rev.1 [2015], para. 50). unhcr is 
leading discussions with other stakeholders (advisory group) and with states to define terms of reference 
and a roadmap for the task force, including by participating in the executive committee of the warsaw 
international mechanism for loss and damage (february 2-5, 2016; april 26-30, 2016) and by providing 
states  with  technical  support  and  expertise  on  climate  and  disaster-related  displacement,  based  on  joint 
recommendations from the advisory group on climate change and human mobility (advisory group 2016). 

50

journal on migration and human securityboth migration and forced displacement are central features of human mobility and require 
specifically tailored responses to each at the international level, which remain perennial 
gaps in the international response. in this respect, the proposed global compacts set out in 
the un secretary-generals report hold much promise (un secretary-general 2016).

b.  addressing  security  concerns  while  ensuring  refugee 

protection
in the wake of recent serious security incidents around the world and large-scale movements 
of people across borders, often with the assistance of smugglers, some have questioned 
whether the 1951 convention is fully equipped to deal with these threats. the convention 
was  devised  specifically  to  protect  individuals  from  acts  of  terror  and  violence  and  to 
ensure the refugee protection regime would not provide a cover for persons who perpetrate 
such acts. specific provisions within the convention therefore provide a system of checks 
and balances that take into account both the security interests of states and the protection 
of refugees. under the 1951 convention, refugees and asylum seekers must abide by the 
laws of their host countries and are not immune from prosecution for crimes committed on 
the territory. they may be subject to other measures, such as detention,11 cancellation or 
revocation of refugee status, extradition, or even expulsion in certain circumstances where 
they may pose a risk to national security or public order, provided that they would not be 
at risk of serious harm in the country to which they are returned.12
in  line  with  these  principles,  unhcr  has  issued  guidance  to  governments,  proposing 
measures to ensure proper reception and screening at borders and assessment of claims (see 
unhcr 2015). this requires systems, such as those outlined in the refugee protection 
and mixed migration: the 10-point plan in action (unhcr 2011), developed almost a 
decade ago, providing practical suggestions for implementing protection-sensitive border 
procedures and systems for receiving individuals who arrive in mixed flows. registering 
arrivals using biometrics, referring them to appropriate procedures, and determining their 
status in a fair and efficient manner ensure that states can make the necessary distinctions 
early on between those in need of international protection and those who may pose a security 
risk. it is often at this stage that many states conduct security screenings by checking travel 
documents against security databases. however, this may not be a foolproof system, as 
many refugees either are forced to flee without the required documents due to the loss 
of  documents  or  difficulty  in  accessing  embassies,  or  may  have  had  to  resort  to  fake 
documents to escape life-threatening situations. also, security checks should be conducted 
in a manner that does not compromise the safety of refugees or their family members in 
their country of origin.

11   the 1951 convention and its 1967 protocol (see footnote 2), as well as human rights law, do not preclude 
restrictions on the movement of asylum seekers, including the use of detention, if necessary in circumstances 
prescribed by law and subject to due process safeguards; for example, when there are strong reasons for 
suspecting links with acts of terrorism and violence in an individual case.
12   see the 1951 convention, art. 32, allowing for the expulsion of refugees in certain circumstances, on 
grounds of national security or public order, where due process is followed and there is no risk that the 
expulsion  would  result  in  return  to  a  place  where  the  refugees  life  or  freedom  would  be  threatened  on 
account of a convention ground. 

51

prospects for responsibility sharingon the other hand, restrictive border management measures that are largely punitive and 
enacted in the name of protecting national security rarely have the desired effect. they do 
not result in a more secure world. pushbacks of people at borders, detention, and limited 
channels for regular entry simply result in diverting refugee movements along other routes, 
forcing people to resort to irregular travel and unauthorized entry, and creating new markets 
and victims for smugglers, who become more reckless and clandestine. smuggling in such 
situations can in practice evolve into situations of constraint and exploitation more akin 
to  human  trafficking. at  the  mercy  of  such  criminal  smuggling  networks,  refugees  are 
vulnerable to  endangerment,  abuse,  exploitation, trafficking,  or  kidnapping  for  ransom. 
restrictive border management policies in this sense may be counterproductive both in 
combatting  criminal  networks  engaged  in  smuggling  and  trafficking  and  in  facilitating 
protection for the victims of such crimes. they also further aggravate already precarious 
security situations in regions caught up in conflict as refugees may amass in border areas 
or be forced back into situations of internal displacement or, even worse, entrapment in 
conflict zones. they also send a message of exclusion that feeds into xenophobia and can 
be used to legitimate violence against asylum seekers and refugees.
long experience has taught us that to be truly effective, measures to ensure security must 
go  hand-in-hand  with  measures  to  provide  protection. while  states  have  the  sovereign 
right to control their borders, they also have an obligation under international human rights 
and refugee law to ensure that individuals in need of international protection are able to 
access and enjoy asylum and be protected against refoulement. an integrated approach 
is required, combining complementary and mutually reinforcing measures to ensure the 
safety of both refugees and host communities. the provisions in the 1951 convention are 
set out specifically to achieve this. they provide the legal basis for reception, registration, 
and screening measures to ensure that persons who may pose threats to security do not take 
advantage of large-scale movements of refugees to try to enter countries for the purpose 
of endangering public safety. early screening measures also help to identify individuals 
at risk, such as victims of trafficking, survivors of sexual and gender-based violence, or 
children at risk, and to connect them with the appropriate procedures and support services. 
efforts to bring smugglers and traffickers to account for their crimes not only need to be 
in keeping with the international legal framework on combatting trafficking, but also need 
to be sensitive to the protection and support needs of the victims, as part of an integrated 
approach.
from a social perspective, such legal measures could be complemented by broader initiatives 
to address root causes, strengthen human rights protection, promote development, facilitate 
peace  and  reconciliation,  and  invest  in  education  and  youth.  community  policing  and 
engagement with refugees can also counter mindsets that give rise to extremism. knowing 
refugees,  speaking  their  language,  and  understanding  their  relationship  with  their  host 
communities enable law enforcement authorities to detect potential problems  whether 
rooted in xenophobia or in extremism  and to address them at an early stage. 
perhaps  the  most  effective tool  for  ensuring  both  security  and  protection  is  facilitating 
integration. effective integration is achieved when refugees are able to participate fully 
in  the  social,  cultural,  and  economic  life  of  their  host  communities,  and  when  host 
communities come to know refugees personally and value their presence. ensuring that 
individuals have sufficient access to resources, services, and health care; realistic prospects 

52

journal on migration and human securityfor livelihoods and a future; and a sense of belonging in their communities  whether 
within their countries of origin or their countries of asylum  can perhaps do more than 
anything else to counter the forces that may lead some of the most disenfranchised towards 
violent extremism.

iv. ensuring protection through more effective assistance
recent developments in the means and methodologies for providing assistance to refugees 
have  the  potential  not  only  to  meet  essential  needs  more  effectively,  but  also  to  yield 
protection results. funding from the international community to capacitate national health 
care, education, and social assistance systems to serve refugees also, would be an essential 
step  towards  ensuring  refugee  access  to  rights  and  services.  where  such  local  service 
delivery systems do not yet exist, it is likewise necessary to find ways for development 
planners to absorb the systems developed by humanitarian organizations, so that they can 
be made available to both refugee and host communities. embedding services to refugees 
within national systems not only reduces duplication, but also can promote integration and 
social cohesion over the longer term.
in addition, the increase in cash-based interventions in refugee situations has proven in 
many cases to be an effective means of focusing assistance and identifying individuals with 
specific needs (see gentilini 2016; world bank group 2016; unhcr 2012b). cash-based 
interventions can complement, as relevant, in-kind assistance, vouchers, and services to 
help address a spectrum of social welfare needs, such as facilitating access to food, water, 
shelter, health care, and essential material assistance. they can also play an important role 
in building livelihoods and facilitating longer-term solutions, such as voluntary repatriation 
and reintegration in countries of origin. 
in  this  sense,  cash-based  programming  empowers  refugees  and  provides  avenues  for 
protection interventions. it can preempt and address negative coping mechanisms, such as 
child labor, survival sex, family separation, forced marriage, or other forms of exploitation, 
that can emerge when refugees are otherwise unable to meet their basic needs. as cash-
based assistance is less visible than in-kind assistance, the risk of extortion and theft can 
be reduced. good program design has proven to protect against the diversion of funds, and 
even in some cases, against gender-based violence. in mass influx situations in particular, 
when individual refugee status determination requiring in-depth interviews may not be 
feasible or practicable, for example, cash-based interventions can be one means by which 
we can continue to identify and respond to evolving needs at the point of identification 
upon registration as well as at the point of delivery, especially for individuals at risk. 
cash-based  programming  can  foster  self-reliance  and  economic  empowerment.  it  also 
has  the  potential  to  contribute  to  greater  social  cohesion  and  reduce  tensions  between 
host  communities  and  refugees,  as  it  can  benefit  and  stimulate  local  economies. when 
refugees purchasing power is increased, they can participate in and contribute to local 
economies, protect their assets, and use the assistance to build livelihoods. in addition, 
cash-based interventions to host communities to renovate homes or fund refugees access 
to national social protection and health care systems can benefit both refugees and their 
host communities.

53

prospects for responsibility sharingv. realizing protection through solutions 
the full realization of refugee protection ultimately hinges on finding durable solutions to 
situations of forced displacement. new initiatives promoting local solutions through the 
inclusion of refugees in development planning and facilitating their right to work have 
great potential. also, efforts to widen opportunities for refugees to access third countries in 
a safe and regular manner would ensure that refugees are able to seek asylum and reunite 
with family members in safety, undercut the market for smuggling and trafficking, and 
share the responsibility more equitably with countries hosting the largest numbers.

a. enhancing self-reliance in countries of asylum

within host countries, self-reliance is important from protection, solutions, and security 
perspectives. it is not only a moral and legal responsibility, but also makes good economic 
sense  regardless  of  whether  longer-term  solutions  are  later  found  for  refugees  outside 
the country. studies have outlined the economic, social, and cultural contributions that 
refugees  can  make  to  their  host  communities  when  the  right  policies  are  in  place.  for 
example, the oecd outlined the potential benefits to host communities that can result if 
they ensure that refugees and asylum seekers have access to language, employment, and 
integration services as soon as possible after their arrival (oecd 2016; see also unhcr 
2016b; oecd and unhcr 2016). 
planning and support for solutions from the outset of a refugee situation require a progressive 
approach aimed at the gradual achievement of rights over the course of displacement. the 
emerging humanitarian-development nexus in programming and funding, as set out in the 
grand  bargain,  agreed  between  major  donors  and  aid  providers  and  launched  at  the 
world humanitarian summit in may 2016,13 is an encouraging step forward in promoting 
solutions  and  facilitating  integration  and  greater  social  cohesion  over  time.  it  not  only 
focuses on being better prepared from the outset of a humanitarian emergency to meet 
immediate needs, but also on planning for longer-term development outcomes. the key is 
to remain engaged throughout the cycle of displacement, from the onset of displacement to 
finding solutions. protection interventions and monitoring, fostering access to livelihoods, 
and reducing vulnerabilities from the start can prevent a worsening of the humanitarian 
situation over time and the consequent pressure on host communities. humanitarian and 
development  interventions  within  such  a  framework  can  more  effectively  complement 
each other, and allow for humanitarian funding to focus more pointedly on protection work 
for the most vulnerable refugees for the duration. 
partnerships between humanitarian and development actors to include refugees in national 
development plans are one way to achieve this, provided that they are accompanied by the 
necessary shifts in political, policy, and institutional arrangements to enable refugees to 
secure effective protection, engage meaningfully in their host societies, and become self-

13   the grand bargain emerged from the recommendations made by the un secretary-generals high-
level panel on humanitarian financing in the report, too important to fail: addressing the humanitarian 
financing gap. see the grand bargain  a shared commitment to better serve people in need (istanbul: 
may 2016), https://consultations2.worldhumanitariansummit.org/bitcache/eb90a59ea8f1c6a87f2c410c1102
e286544dabbb?vid=566924&disposition=inline&op=view. 

54

journal on migration and human securityreliant. more predictable humanitarian financing throughout the displacement process and 
more resources directed through national and local systems will be essential to this process.
central to effective self-reliance is ensuring that refugees can develop their skills and access 
livelihood opportunities to support themselves and their families and contribute to their 
communities. access to education and work allows refugees to live with dignity and plan 
for their futures. it capacitates refugees to contribute to not only their countries of asylum, 
but also their countries of origin, should safe and dignified return become a possibility. a 
shift in thinking is needed to emphasize this aspect, as it is empowering for refugees and 
can strengthen local economies. lifting reservations on the right to work under the 1951 
convention would be an important step in facilitating this. engaging refugees in work related 
to the provision of assistance and services to their own communities is another possibility, 
if such programs are both formulated according to a rights-based approach recognizing the 
right to work and providing for safe and dignified conditions of employment, and grounded 
in an analysis of the local context (see unhcr 2014).
labor mobility schemes, either within the country of asylum or a third country, are making 
headway in realizing the right to work and are beneficial for refugees, companies, and 
national and regional economies. they enable refugees to move to increase their levels 
of income and standard of living. they can address human resource and capital shortages 
as well as promote innovation and the transfer of skills. the protection benefits of labor 
mobility schemes are myriad, as employment and improved household income contribute 
to self-reliance and resilience, reduce negative coping mechanisms, prepare refugees for 
longer-term solutions either in or outside the country, reduce dependency on humanitarian 
aid and, in some cases, facilitate a path to permanent residency or naturalization. we are 
already starting to see this emerge in regional arrangements that may help facilitate the 
movement  of  refugees  with  specific  skills  to  the  countries  where  such  skills  are  most 
needed.14 unhcr has also recently entered into memoranda of understanding with the 
oecd and the international labour organization, respectively, to promote employment 
opportunities for refugees both within their countries of asylum and beyond.

b. expanding complementary pathways for admission

labor  mobility  schemes  are  just  one  example  of  how  countries  can  help  shoulder  the 
responsibility for refugees by offering them opportunities outside of their first countries 
of asylum. this not only empowers refugees, but when offered in significant numbers, can 
also alleviate some of the pressure on host communities. other such opportunities for safe, 

14   examples may be found in the economic community of west african states (ecowas) freedom of 
movement  protocols,  which  provide  eligible  nationals  with  secure  residence  and  work  entitlements;  the 
common east african community (eac) passports allowing citizens of member states to travel and, possibly 
soon,  to  work  freely  in  the  region;  the  southern  common  market  (mercosur)  agreement  permitting 
citizens of argentina, bolivia, chile, colombia, paraguay, peru, and uruguay and their legal dependants to 
obtain temporary residence and work rights; the economic community of central african states (eccas) 
framework  providing  for  the  right  of  establishment,  including  employment,  in  four  countries;  and  the 
common  market  for  eastern  and  southern africa  (comesa)  implementing  a  protocol  on  the  gradual 
relaxation and eventual elimination of visa requirements and a protocol on the free movement of persons, 
labor, services, and the right of establishment and residence.

55

prospects for responsibility sharingregular admission to third countries include resettlement, humanitarian admission, family 
reunification, medical evacuation, and student visas and scholarships, as well as easing or 
lifting legal barriers or administrative requirements for admission. taken together, these 
channels for admission are frequently referred to as complementary pathways that can 
facilitate both protection and solutions, as well as demonstrate responsibility sharing. they 
can also provide viable alternatives to refugees who may otherwise consider resorting to 
dangerous onward movements or turning to unscrupulous smugglers for assistance.
in the humanitarian and refugee protection world, resettlement has long been the primary 
tool for securing admission of refugees to third countries. over the past decade, more than 
one million refugees have been resettled to some 30 countries, and the number referred 
by unhcr to resettlement countries is expected to grow by up to a third each year.15 yet, 
despite these encouraging numbers, they still fall far short of the global resettlement needs, 
as unhcr estimates that in 2017, 1.19 million refugees will be in need of resettlement 
(unhcr  2016c). this  situation  requires  that  we  find  ways  in  the  immediate  future  to 
complement traditional resettlement with new programs aimed at broadening opportunities 
for refugees to access other admission channels, as long as provisions are made to ensure 
their protection in light of their unique status. refugees who benefit from such schemes 
should, of course, continue to retain protection against refoulement, have access to non-
national travel documents, be able to reenter first countries of asylum if needed, and enjoy 
the protection of their rights, including workers rights, in the third countries of admission. 
countries offering such programs will also need to demonstrate some flexibility with regard 
to requirements for admission, bearing in mind that travel documents, proof of study or 
certification, access to embassies, or prohibitive fees could pose barriers to refugee access. 
when such opportunities are provided, in full consideration of the legal and protection 
needs  of  refugees,  they  may  also  serve  as  stepping  stones  to  longer-term  solutions   
whether it be remaining in the third country and building a new life there or returning to 
ones country of origin to participate in reconstruction and reconciliation processes.
recognizing this imperative, the migration policy institute and unhcr recently joined 
efforts  in  2016  to  facilitate  a  roundtable  entitled  additional  pathways  for  refugees: 
exploring the potential and addressing barriers (see unhcr and mpi europe 2016). 
unhcr also convened a series of high-level meetings on global responsibility sharing 
through pathways for admission of syrian refugees over the past three years, which have 
secured offers of more than 201,000 places for syrian refugees to date (unhcr 2016d). 
a  number  of  countries  in  both  europe  and  latin america  have  also  begun  exploring 
possibilities for scholarship schemes, family reunification, and skilled migration.
family  unity  is  particularly  important,  as  many  refugees  travel  onward  to  reunite  with 
close family members. not only is this a right that needs to be respected, it has also proved 
to be critical for the effective integration of refugees. when refugees know that their family 
members are safe with them and that they can rely upon each other for support, they are 
able to participate and integrate into their host communities more effectively.

15   in 2015, unhcr submitted some 107,100 refugees representing 65 nationalities to 30 countries in 2015; 
in 2016, unhcr will submit 143,000 for resettlement, and in 2017 nearly 170,000 (see trk 2016).

56

journal on migration and human securityvi. recommendations and conclusion
the challenges that the international refugee protection regime faces today are immense, 
but are not insurmountable. what is needed now is to put our collective resources and 
capacities to their most effective use. this article has made numerous recommendations 
regarding how to accomplish this goal, including the following: 

1. 

commit to share responsibility for refugees:

  support the proposed global compact on responsibility sharing for refugees, as 

set out in the un secretary-generals report.

2. 

3.	

4. 

  agree  upon  responsibility-sharing  arrangements,  defining  when  they  would  be 
needed, measures that would be taken, and a framework for states to contribute in 
line with their capacities and to receive support according to their levels of need.
uphold obligations to protect refugees:
institute new forms of group determination and the strategic use of refugee status 
determination,  combined  with  community-based  protection  and  other  measures, 
to ensure an appropriate legal status while at the same time identifying specific 
protection needs. 

  develop wider and more consistent applications of refugee protection principles 

 

through accessions and lifting reservations to the relevant refugee instruments.

  use  protection  strategies  to  inform  frameworks  for  governing  migration  and 

meeting the needs of the most vulnerable migrants. 
implement  protection-sensitive  border  procedures  and  systems  for  receiving 
individuals who arrive in mixed movements to ensure the security of both refugees 
and host communities. 
ensure	protection	through	more	effective	assistance:

 

  fund national health care, education, and social assistance systems to also serve 

refugees and ensure refugee access to rights and services. 

  expand  cash-based  programming,  alongside,  as  relevant,  in-kind  assistance, 
vouchers, and services, to help identify and address protection and social welfare 
needs,  build  livelihoods,  and  facilitate  longer-term  solutions,  such  as  voluntary 
repatriation and reintegration. 
realize protection through solutions:

  enhance self-reliance in countries of asylum, for example by including refugees in 

development planning and facilitating their right to work.

  create  opportunities  for  safe,  regular  admission  to  third  countries  through,  for 
example, resettlement, humanitarian admission, labor mobility, family reunification, 
medical evacuation, and student visas and scholarships, as well as easing or lifting 
legal barriers or administrative requirements for admission. 

taken  together  these  recommendations  not  only  will  ameliorate  the  existing  hardships 
experienced by refugees, but also will provide the building blocks for achieving longer-
term solutions, which remain, as ever, the ultimate aspiration of the international refugee 
protection regime.

57

prospects for responsibility sharing