making america 1920 again? 
nativism and us immigration, 
past and present

julia g. young 
the catholic university of america

executive summary
this  paper  surveys  the  history  of  nativism  in  the  united  states  from 
the late nineteenth century to the present. it compares a recent surge in 
nativism with earlier periods, particularly the decades leading up to the 
1920s, when nativism directed against southern and eastern european, 
asian, and mexican migrants led to comprehensive legislative restrictions 
on immigration. it is based primarily on a review of historical literature, 
as well as contemporary immigration scholarship. major findings include 
the following:
  there  are  many  similarities  between  the  nativism  of  the  1870-1930 
period and today, particularly the focus on the purported inability of 
specific immigrant groups to assimilate, the misconception that they 
may  therefore  be  dangerous  to  the  native-born  population,  and  fear 
that immigration threatens american workers.

  mexican migrants in particular have been consistent targets of nativism, 

immigration restrictions, and deportations.

  there are also key differences between these two eras, most apparently 
in the targets of nativism, which today are undocumented and muslim 
immigrants, and in president trumps consistent, highly public, and 
widely disseminated appeals to nativist sentiment.

  historical studies of nativism suggest that nativism does not disappear 
completely, but rather subsides. furthermore, immigrants themselves 
can and do adopt nativist attitudes, as well as their descendants.

  politicians, government officials, civic leaders, scholars and journalists 
must do more to reach sectors of society that feel most threatened by 
immigration.

  while eradicating nativism may be impossible, a focus on avoiding or 
overturning nativist immigration legislation may prove more successful. 

 2017 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 5 number 1 (2017): 217-235introduction
scholars will spend decades debating the reasons for donald trumps stunning electoral 
victory in 2016, yet at least some of the credit must go to his campaigns famous slogan 
make america great again. certainly, the phrase was one of the factors that inspired 
millions of people to elect trump as 45th president of the united states. the first three 
words, after all, comprise a forward-looking call to action and a patriotic promise about the 
future, rolled into one. 
historians who wish to understand and analyze trumps success, however, should perhaps 
focus on the last word of the slogan: again. this single word transforms the phrase into 
a commitment to revisit (if not recreate) a specific historical era  one when america 
was great. neither the candidate nor the campaign ever explicitly defined their concept 
of  greatness  (for  whom  was america  great?  when?  and  why?).  nevertheless,  this  was 
probably an effective technique: voters were free to make their own assumptions, without 
too much information about a detailed policy agenda.
throughout the campaign, however, trump and his surrogates argued that one key problem 
has been preventing the america of today from being sufficiently great. that problem is 
immigration. 
trump  famously  launched  his  campaign  by  calling  mexican  immigrants  rapists  and 
criminals,  and  repeatedly  promised  a  big,  beautiful  wall  along  the  southern  border. 
he also continuously linked immigration to terrorism, called for a total and complete 
shutdown of muslims entering the united states, and, after his inauguration, promising 
to give immigration preference to persecuted christian refugees (trump 2015; brody 
2017). since the very first week of the new administration, when the president released 
three executive orders, two to crack down on undocumented immigration and one to restrict 
travel from muslim-majority nations and to cut the us refugee admissions program, the 
trump administration has made it very clear that its vision for american greatness is a 
nativist one. 
in this nativist vision, the time period to which we return is one in which immigration is 
sharply restricted by national, ethnic, and religious criteria. perhaps we have an answer, 
then, to the unanswered question within make america great again: trumps america 
is looking more and more like the america of 1920. 
in 1920, immigrants made up 13.2 percent of the population  making the demographic 
landscape analogous to today, when the foreign-born make up 13.5 percent of all americans. 
then, as now, both the masses and educated elites held deep suspicions, hostility, and fear of 
these immigrants. many viewed them as being too different to assimilate into the majority 
culture. as a result, politicians and the press frequently portrayed immigration as a threat 
to the nation. by the early 1920s, these long-held nativist fears generated new restrictive 
legislation that would cause the number and percent of foreign-born in the united states to 
decline sharply for decades afterwards. 
once again, the united states finds itself in an era of nativism and exclusion, as our politicians 
contemplate immigration restrictions and deportation policies that are reminiscent of those 
enacted nearly a century ago. a detailed review of nativism and immigration policy in the 

218

journal on migration and human securityperiod of 1870-1940, then, can tell us much about where we are today, and may also help 
us answer questions about where we are going.

nativism  and  immigration  policy  in  the  united  states, 
1870-1940
there  were  several  reasons  for  the  massive  wave  of  immigration  that  so  changed  the 
united states during the late nineteenth century. historian jose moya pinpoints five major 
revolutions that pushed people away from europe and towards the united states. these 
were: 1) rising growth rates and declining mortality rates in europe; 2) the dominance of 
liberalism  in  european  political  thought,  which  allowed  for  the  unrestricted  movement 
of peoples; 3) the transition from subsistence to commercial agriculture, which created a 
surplus rural population and released peasants ties to the land; 4) the industrial revolution, 
which further mobilized the labor force by creating a demand for labor in industrial centers; 
and 5) developments in transportation that made ocean and land travel easier and cheaper, 
effectively shortening the distances between the old and new world (moya 1999, 13-44). 
such large-scale changes help explain why so many europeans immigrated to the united 
states  after  the  1840s,  and  why    as  industrialization  spread  across  the  continent   
european migrants came mostly from southern and eastern europe by the last quarter 
of the nineteenth century. to a certain extent, these factors were also applicable in japan, 
which had modernized quickly in the nineteenth century; as well as china, korea, and the 
philippines (hsu 2000; choy 2003; azuma 2005). thus, after the 1870s, the united states 
(as well as other countries in the western hemisphere, particularly argentina, brazil, and 
cuba) saw sharply increasing migrant populations from southern and eastern europe and 
asia. after 1900, this population included increasing numbers of mexicans, as well.
nativist movements had targeted immigrants well before this period, and indeed throughout 
us history. one of the more well-known of these was the know-nothing party, which was 
formed by anti-catholic and anti-irish members of the working class during the 1840s 
and 1850s (boisonneault 2017). yet even the know-nothings were never able to create 
and pass national legislation on nativist grounds. rather, before the 1880s, immigration to 
the united states was marked not by legislation, but rather by the lack of it. beginning in 
the last two decades of the nineteenth century, however, heightened feelings of nativism 
among  the  public  and  policymakers  alike  prompted  policymakers  to  move  away  from 
liberal immigration policies and towards a raft of new restrictions. 
at the root of these nativist impulses were several intertwined phenomena. in the popular 
imagination, the new immigrants of the post-1870 period were unassimilable because 
of their race, ethnicity, and culture. commonly held beliefs of the time, many of which 
originated  in  the  so-called  science  of  eugenics,  defined  specific  national  and  ethnic 
groups as inherently better or worse than others.1 yet economics also played a role: nativist 
restrictions were often accepted and promoted by working-class whites, who believed that 

 
1   for a seminal work on nativism in the united states, see higham (1995). more recent works include 
schrag (2010). for a fascinating treatment of eugenics as it was expressed and reiterated in latin america, 
see stepan (1991).

219

making america 1920 again? nativism and us immigration, past and presentthey were losing job opportunities to immigrants. this was certainly true in california, 
where chinese and other immigrants from asia became the first targets of this new wave 
of nativism.

asian immigration to the american west
as  with  many  other  national  groups,  native  resentment  against  chinese  and  asian 
immigrants increased proportionately in relation to contact and competition between these 
immigrants  and  the  native-born.  chinese  immigration  began  between  1850  and  1860, 
when almost 50,000 chinese came across the pacific for jobs in the mining industry and on 
the railroads (howland 1929, 494). by the 1880s, the chinese immigrant population had 
become much more widely dispersed through the coast and mountain states of the west. 
native resentment of the chinese arose from the perception that they were an unassimilable, 
even subversive group, [whose] vicious customs and habits were a social menace (jones 
1960, 248). their perceived inability to assimilate was blamed on their appearance  not 
only their physical characteristics, but also their traditional dress and the hairstyle of male 
migrants  as well as their tendency to preserve the cultural practices and language of 
their home country. their culture was cast not only as primitive and backward, but also 
as an existential threat to us democratic institutions: a yellow peril, in the parlance of 
the times. economic factors also played a role: the chinese competed with whites for 
jobs in gold mining and the railroad industry, and they were often willing to work for 
lower pay. in addition, an economic downturn during the 1870s caused increased labor 
competition between chinese immigrants and the native-born, especially as more native 
workers migrated from the east to take jobs in california (kraut 1982, 156; fuchs and 
forbes 2003, 152).
together, nativist resentment and economic competition fueled reprisals against the chinese 
population in the west. politicians used legislation to target and humiliate the chinese, as 
when california legislators passed a queue ordinance that required people convicted of 
criminal offenses to have their hair cut to a one-inch length (howland 1929, 494). whites 
also committed acts of violence: rioters killed 21 chinese immigrants in san francisco in 
1871, and set 25 chinese laundries on fire in 1877, to name just two examples (kraut 1982, 
156-57). 
after the 1870s, nativists organized political movements against the chinese as well. most 
notable of these was the workingmens party, lead by an irish-born sailor in san francisco 
named  dennis  kearney.  the  party  demanded  that  the  us  government  cut  off  chinese 
immigration  and  limit  the  rights  of  the  chinese  in  the  united  states.  despite  protests 
by  chinese  diplomats,  the  chinese-american  community,  and  a  few  more  enlightened 
politicians, the workingmens party formed a voting bloc just large enough to hold the 
balance of power in california, and so was an important impetus to legislation against 
chinese immigrants in the 1880s (ibid., 160).
during this decade, legislators passed a series of successively more restrictive laws that 
limited the rights of chinese in the united states and barred new chinese immigrants from 
entry into the country. most significantly, the chinese exclusion act of 1882 suspended 

220

journal on migration and human securityimmigration of chinese laborers for 10 years, and was renewed periodically until 1943. 
the exclusion act also stipulated that all chinese had to obtain certificates proving their 
eligibility to live and work in the united states. in 1887, the scott act prohibited the return 
of any chinese who left the country, even those who were legal residents or citizens. the 
1892 geary act denied bail to chinese in habeas corpus cases and required all chinese to 
obtain a certificate of eligibility to remain in the united states. if a chinese immigrant was 
arrested without the certificate, the burden of proof fell upon him to prove his eligibility to 
live and remain in the united states. these and other legislative restrictions (especially the 
immigration acts of 1917 and 1924) ensured that chinese immigration to the united states 
was effectively prohibited for nearly three-quarters of a century.
the success of the anti-chinese movement helped to fuel very similar mobilizations against 
the japanese, koreans, and filipinos in the west, who had arrived for similar reasons, albeit 
later and in smaller numbers than the chinese. like the chinese, these immigrants were 
characterized by nativists as inherently different  immoral, subversive, and servile  
and therefore impossible to assimilate (jones 1960, 264). after the japanese and korean 
populations increased after the 1900s, white californians led labor campaigns and other 
mobilizations against them in the state. in 1905, nativists formed the japanese and korean 
exclusion  league,  and  the  following  year  the  san  francisco  school  board  ordered  all 
oriental students into segregated schools. the nativist movement against the japanese 
eventually resulted in the gentlemens agreement of 1907, in which the us government 
persuaded the japanese government to deny passports to emigrants (howland 1929, 502-
03). restrictions and discrimination against the japanese population continued until the 
japanese were barred almost completely from immigration in 1924. filipinos also faced 
resistance and hostility for all of the same reasons: they were cast by nativists as immoral, 
criminal, and unassimilable, and in 1934, the philippine independence act installed a quota 
of only 50 filipino immigrants per year (jones 1960, 288). by the end of the 1930s, asians 
were almost completely excluded from immigration to the united states, and they would 
remain so for decades.

the rise of the quota system
the nativist organizing that led to the eventual exclusion of asian immigrants preceded and 
overlapped with similar movements against european immigrants in the late nineteenth and 
early twentieth centuries. while chinese, japanese, korean, and filipino immigration had 
occurred primarily on the west coast, the immigration of southern and eastern europeans 
was a great concern to the native population in the east and midwest. before 1860, most 
immigrants  had  come  from  the  british  isles,  germany,  scandinavia,  switzerland,  and 
holland. by 1900, close to 70 percent of all immigrants originated in regions and countries 
including austria-hungary, italy, russia, greece, romania, and turkey (ibid., 179). this 
immigration mushroomed after the 1880s: whereas only 2.5 million europeans entered the 
country in each decade between 1860 and 1880, during a single decade in the 1880s, over 
five million europeans arrived, and 16 million entered in the subsequent quarter century 
(fuchs and forbes 2003, 152). 
resentment by natives against the new waves of european immigrants stemmed from long-
held racial and cultural prejudices among americans of northern and western european 

221

making america 1920 again? nativism and us immigration, past and presentheritage  about  non-western  europeans,  and  particularly  against  jews. these  prejudices 
fueled the perception that the southern and eastern europeans, like asian immigrants, were 
simply too different from the native-born to assimilate. as with the chinese and asian 
immigrants, southern and eastern european immigrants differences in language, religion, 
economic background, and traditions made them seem undesirable to the native population. 
many  of  the  new  immigrants  from  eastern  europe  and  russia  were  jews,  who  were 
regarded with particular hostility both by the working classes and by elites. stereotypically 
portrayed as greedy and materialistic, resented as competitors for work and housing in the 
urban slums, or vilified for their religious beliefs, the rise in jewish immigration prompted 
anti-semitic protests by the knights of labor and the other populist groups in the 1890s 
and afterwards (garis 1927, 213; curran 1975, 112-13). 
slavic  immigrants,  too,  were  ill-regarded  by  many  of  the  native-born.  poles,  czechs, 
russians,  and  other eastern  europeans were  portrayed  as  socialists and  anarchists, and 
often blamed for crime and labor conflict (howland 1929, 445). frequent complaints were 
made about the perceived unruliness of eastern europeans. one contemporary commentator 
noted that in any polish church congregation  a free fight, or a riot with bludgeons and 
firearms, may be expected at any moment (curran 1975, 114). 
southern europeans, like the slavs, were often reviled because of the perception that they 
were criminally inclined. nativists accused the italians and greeks of a distinct tendency 
to abduction and kidnapping, while the russians were charged with larceny and receiving 
stolen goods (kraut 1982, 158). according to one contemporary observer, italians drank to 
excess, they lived in filth, and at the slightest provocation, they went for the stiletto (curran 
1975, 115). and one author, although writing a fairly tolerant sociological assessment of 
greek immigrants, asserted nevertheless that [greeks] are probably a greater tax on the 
police courts of the country, in proportion to their total number, than any other class of our 
population (fairchild 1911, 239). all of these groups faced discrimination and hostility 
from the native-born population.
the american  working  classes  resented  these  new  waves  of  european  immigrants  not 
only for their perceived criminality and cultural differences, but also because of the labor 
competition  that  they  represented.  natives,  confronting  economic  downturns  after  the 
1870s, saw the new immigrants as a threat to their personal welfare, and expressed this in 
a fear-ridden and sometimes hysterical hatred of foreigners (jones 1960, 253).
upper-class  intellectuals,  the  press,  and  business  elites  were  also  opposed  to  the  new 
immigration  on  the  basis  of  racial  and  economic  grounds,  and  their  opinions    often 
published in the media  helped to fuel working class resentment and xenophobia. in the 
early twentieth century as the nativist furor reached its peak, books such as the passing 
of the great race, by eugenicist madison grant, and editorialists such as kenneth roberts 
of the saturday evening post, brought stereotypes about the supposed inferiority of new 
immigrants  to  a  broad  audience  (curran  1975,  136)  throughout  the  period,  political 
cartoonists such as thomas nast produced endless racialized images that cast immigrants 
as  unsavory-looking  figures  whose  inherent  attributes  threatened  the  united  states 
(schrag 2010, 61-62). and, as historian alan kraut (1995) describes, americans across the 
social and political spectrum frequently blamed immigrants for bringing disease into the 

222

journal on migration and human securityunited states, creating a kind of medicalized nativism that led to humiliating immigration 
inspections, and helped drive the impetus for legal restrictions on immigration.
prior to world war i, legislation did not explicitly restrict the selection or composition of 
immigrants based on race or nationality, with the exception of asian immigrants. in general, 
it attempted to exclude people based on income level, education, and moral, biological, and 
physical qualities. the immigration act of 1875, for example, barred prostitutes and alien 
convicts, while the immigration act of 1882 prohibited the entry of the insane, the mentally 
disabled,  convicts,  and  those  liable  to  become  a  public  charge.  in  1891,  immigration 
legislation excluded people suffering from loathsome or contagious diseases and aliens 
convicted of crimes involving moral turpitude (fuchs and forbes 2003, 154).2 
after the turn of the century, the provisions in the immigration act grew increasingly strict. 
the rationale for this crackdown was a 40-volume report published by the dillingham 
commission, which was formed in 1909 by congress in order to assess the effects of asian 
and southern and eastern european immigration. the commission began its work convinced 
that the pseudoscientific racist theories of superior and inferior peoples were correct and 
that the more recent immigrants from southern and eastern europe were not capable of 
becoming successful americans (ibid., 55). despite the fact that the data they collected 
did not support their preconceived notions about these immigrant groups, members of the 
commission made policy recommendations based on their nativist assumptions. published 
in 1911, their report endorsed the exclusion of undesirable classes, races, and ethnicities, 
but advocated a literacy test and a tax for all immigrants as an effective tool for achieving 
this exclusion. with the support of the dillingham commission findings and a refreshed 
xenophobia after the onset of the first world war, the 1917 immigration act established a 
literacy requirement and a head tax on all migrants entering the united states. 
even though the literacy tests were created in order to filter out the majority of the new 
immigrants, it became apparent in the late 1910s that these measures were not achieving 
their goals. between 1918 and 1921, only about 1,500 people per year were kept out of 
the country based on illiteracy (howland 1929, 444). in response, legislators began to take 
definitive steps towards the installation of a quota system that would limit immigration 
based on the national origins of immigrants. 
taking  inspiration  from  the  results  of  the  dillingham  study,  the  emergency  quota act 
took effect on june 3, 1921. the act restricted all immigration from europe and european 
colonies, excluding most countries in the western hemisphere. from each of the restricted 
european countries, immigration was limited to three percent of the number of foreign-
born persons from that country resident in the united states at the time of the 1910 census. 
even  this  unprecedented  legislation  did  not  satisfy  the  nativist  agenda,  as  immigration 
rates did not fall quickly enough. to strengthen the restrictions, the johnson-reed act of 
1924 set even more explicit prohibitions against immigrants based on their nationality, 
establishing an annual limit of 150,000 on immigration from europe, prohibiting japanese 
immigration entirely, and installing even more specified quotas that restricted immigration 
from any specific country to two percent of the number of foreign-born persons from that 
country at the time of the 1890 census. 

2   also see description in howland (1929, 431).

223

making america 1920 again? nativism and us immigration, past and presentonce the law took effect in 1929, it effectively ended the great wave of new european 
immigration that had begun in the last quarter of the nineteenth century. while immigration 
from  great  britain,  ireland,  germany,  and  the  scandinavian  countries  was  relatively 
unrestricted, southern and eastern european immigration was dramatically reduced, causing 
the overall numbers of immigrants to decline steeply. from a high of over 800,000 in 1921, 
european immigration dropped to 700,000 in 1924, to 300,000 per year from 1925 until 
1928, and to less than 150,000 by the end of the decade (jones 1960, 279). throughout 
the 1920s, though, another immigrant group was coming to the united states in increasing 
numbers.

nativism and mexican immigration
the restrictive legislation that was crafted in response to asian and european immigration 
in the united states was also notable for a significant omission. although mexico had 
become one of the most important new sources of immigration to the united states after 
1890, mexican immigration went almost unrestricted until the late 1920s. this was not 
because american nativists were more tolerant of mexicans than of other immigrants. on 
the contrary, mexicans were often portrayed as even less desirable, from a racial standpoint, 
than europeans. despite this, economic factors prevented immigration legislation from 
affecting mexicans for almost four decades. 
between 1890 and 1917, the expanding railroad system and the emergence of new industries 
in the southwest and midwest led to an increase in the demand for labor (rosales 1978; 
cardoso 1980, 18-20). as noted above, however, asian immigration had begun to decline 
following the chinese exclusion act of 1892. further restriction of european and asian 
immigration, both before and after world war i, created new openings for mexican labor. 
as a result, patterns in mexican employment changed greatly during this period. whereas 
mexicans had worked in agriculture, railroads, and mining prior to the war, afterwards they 
could be found in automobile factories, steel and meatpacking plants, stockyards, and the 
service and transportation industries. settlement patterns at this time also became more 
urbanized and geographically dispersed. migrants no longer remained in the agricultural 
southwest, where competition had lowered wages, but instead began to settle in urban 
areas in california, texas, and the midwest as well. by the end of 1917, policymakers in 
the united states had become aware that almost every sector of the economy . . . depended 
heavily on the bracero (cardoso 1980, 51). this pattern only intensified after the new 
immigration quotas were applied in 1921 and 1924.
the  increased  presence  of  mexican  migrants  in  the  united  states  drew  out  the  same 
xenophobia and nativism that had been directed towards asians and europeans. nativist 
groups and labor organizations were vocal in their advocacy for legislative restrictions 
of  mexican  immigration.  opponents  to  mexican  migration  argued  that  the  mexicans 
indian blood would pollute the nations genetic purity, and his biologically determined 
degenerate character traits would sap the countrys moral fiber and corrupt its institutions 
(reisler 1976, 38).  as with other immigrant groups, nativists argued that the differences 
between  mexicans  and  the  native  population  would  prevent  mexican  immigrants  from 
ever assimilating in mainstream society. 

224

journal on migration and human securitydespite  the  forcefulness  of  the  nativists  pleas  to  restrict  mexican  immigration,  the 
agricultural and industrial lobbies put significant pressure on lawmakers to waive mexican 
nationals from the requirements of the immigration laws of the 1910s and 1920s. for example, 
although literacy tests required by the immigration act of 1917 could have severely limited 
mexican immigration, they were not applied to immigrants from the western hemisphere. 
the immigration acts of 1921 and 1924, as well, did not apply to this group of immigrants 
and thus did not limit the entrance of mexican workers. mexican migration, therefore, 
continued in the patterns established during world war i and increased in volume and 
geographic distribution. by 1929, mexican migration had spread even further throughout 
the country (cardoso 1980, 82-92). 
by  the  end  of  the  1920s,  however,  the  nativist  drumbeat  grew  impossible  to  ignore. 
between 1926 and 1930, there were numerous discussions in government and the media 
about whether to apply the immigration quotas of the 1921 and 1924 laws to mexicans 
 one proposed measure, the box bill of 1926  would have included mexicans in the 
quota system. pressure from agricultural and economic interests kept such legislation from 
becoming enacted, but only as long as the economy remained strong. 
in the end, while national origins quotas were never rewritten to include immigrants from 
the western hemisphere, immigration from mexico declined steeply anyway. in 1929, as 
the stock markets crashed and unemployment began to rise, native-born us citizens targeted 
mexican immigrants. across the country, local and federal officials launched repatriation 
drives  raids and campaigns to deport mexican immigrants back to mexico. 
in cities and towns across the united states, mexican workers and their families were 
pressured (and in many cases, forced) to return to mexico. many of them had entered the 
united states legally, and many  especially their children  were american citizens. 
the repatriation campaigns expelled hundreds of thousands of mexicans (some estimate 
as many as 1.8 million), and continued throughout the 1930s, in what historian francisco 
balderrama has labeled a decade of betrayal (balderrama and rodriguez 2006).3 

immigration and nativism in the united states, 1930 to 
present
the  steep  decline  in  asian,  european,  and  mexican  migration  after  1929    and  the 
immigration  legislation  that  precipitated  it    marked  a  watershed  moment  in  us 
immigration  history.  for  the  next  four  decades,  throughout  the  great  depression,  the 
second world war, and the cold war, the number of immigrants would decline steadily, 
and by 1970, the proportion of immigrants as a percentage of the us population reached 
4.7 percent, the lowest point since at least 1850.4
once again, mexican immigration proved an exception to this trend. as mentioned above, 
immigrants from the western hemisphere were excluded from the quotas, and labor was 
greatly needed in the immediate post-war period. to address this issue, the us and mexican 

3   for the statistic on 1.8 million, see wagner (2017). 
4   for us census data on migration, see campbell and lennon (1999). see also migration policy institute 
(n.d.). 

225

making america 1920 again? nativism and us immigration, past and presentgovernments created the bracero program (1944-64), which brought mexican migrants 
to the united states as legal temporary guest workers. at its peak, nearly 50,000 farms 
employed more than 400,000 mexicans per year (rosenblum et al. 2012). the program had 
many administrative problems, however, and undocumented migration from mexico also 
increased concurrently. millions of mexican migrants without papers were then targeted for 
frequent deportation drives, such as during operation wetback in 1954. mexican laborers 
have been the primary target for periodic deportation drives ever since.5
the end of the bracero program coincided with the immigration and nationality act of 
1965, which marked a momentous change not only for mexican migrants, but of the entire 
migration landscape in the united states. the new law put an end to the quota system, 
and replaced it with a preference based on family relationships and professional skills. 
throughout  the  1980s,  1990s,  and  2000s,  the  number  and  percentage  of  immigrants 
rose continuously and steeply, and the ethnic makeup of the newest wave of immigrants 
changed significantly, with immigration from asia and the americas eclipsing immigration 
from europe (chishti, hipsman, and ball 2015). additionally, the united states had begun 
welcoming  refugees  after  the  displaced  persons act  of  1948  (although  congress  only 
standardized the placement of refugees after 1980, with the refugee act of 1980).
for  mexicans  and  other  migrants  from  the  western  hemisphere,  the  1965  act  also 
contributed to a steep rise in undocumented immigration, since it established a numeric 
cap on immigration from the western hemisphere. other factors also played a role in the 
growth of the undocumented population, such as the termination of the bracero program in 
1964 and population growth in mexico and many other latin american states, combined 
with limited employment opportunities and stagnant wages. at the same time, the united 
states  experienced  growth  in  the  agricultural  and  service  sector.  these  factors  pushed 
undocumented migration from mexico and other countries in the americas to new heights 
in the 1980s and 1990s (with mexicans forming the largest single group of undocumented 
immigrants). since the 1990s, the united states also saw an increase in the undocumented 
immigrant population from other regions of the globe (passel and cohn 2016). 
us lawmakers passed a series of laws over these two decades in order to attempt to address 
the issue. the first of these was the immigration reform and control act of 1986 (irca), 
which created sanctions for employers of undocumented immigrants, while also providing 
paths to legalization for some immigrants. subsequent legislation, such as the immigration 
act of 1990 and the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996, 
authorized increased resources for border enforcement and expanded the criminal grounds 
of removal, among other measures (rosenblum et al. 2012).
despite  these  reforms,  mexican  undocumented  migration  increased  steadily  until  the 
mid-2000s, as did migrant deaths along the border. beginning in late 1993, an intensified 
border patrol presence at traditionally heavy crossing routes prompted mexicans and other 
migrants to cross in more remote and perilous areas (clinic 2001, 5-15). while mexican 
migration has slowed in the past decade (due to largely changing demographic trends in 
mexico), violence and poverty in central america, as well as economic and political factors 

5   for an anthropological study of the effects of drives on mexican immigrants and their families, see boehm 
(2016).

226

journal on migration and human securityelsewhere, have continued to fuel undocumented immigration (ibid). thus, undocumented 
immigration to the united states remains a persistent political, social, and human rights 
challenge. 
by  2015,  immigrants  made  up  13.5  percent  of  the  us  population    a  proportion  not 
seen since 1920. today, the united states finds itself at a historical moment that bears 
some resemblance to the 1920s: it is experiencing a second great wave of immigration 
(greico 2014). unfortunately, it is also experiencing another great wave of nativism. once 
again, the newest generation of immigrants  many of them from latin america, asia, the 
middle east, and africa  are subject to nativist suspicions that they are too different from 
previous waves of immigrants to assimilate, and that they therefore represent a threat to the 
native-born population (schrag 2010, 163-93). since september 11, 2001, politicians and 
the media have increasingly framed undocumented immigration and refugee resettlement 
as a national security threat, as well.6
it is up for debate whether todays nativism is a new phenomenon, or whether it is simply 
a  persistent  current  that  has  been  present  throughout  the  last  century.  certainly,  the 
earlier nativism persisted well after the restrictionist laws of the 1920s were enacted and 
implemented. one only has to review the racial history of the 1930s, when the united 
states provided a fertile field for individual economic and social crackpots and rabble-
rousers, left and right . . . who worked xenophobia, racism, nativism, and anti-semitism 
with renewed vigor (ibid., 145). among the most vocal opponents of immigrants were 
gerald l. k. smith, founder of the america first party, and irish catholic priest charles 
coughlin,  whose  xenophobic  weekly  radio  show  railed  against  jewish  immigrants  in 
particular. and certainly, nativism played a role in the refusal of the us public to accept 
jewish refugees from the second world war; in public acceptance of japanese internment 
camps during the same period; in the continued deportations of mexican migrants; and 
in resistance to the resettlement of vietnamese refugees in the 1970s, to name just a few 
examples (kraut 2016).
yet, there are also differences between the two eras. todays nativism, for example, is 
less likely to be directed at europeans, asians, and catholics, but rather at undocumented 
immigrants, the majority of whom are mexican and central american, and at muslims.  
the current rhetoric against undocumented immigrants centers on the charges that they 
are an economic drain on society (because of the perception that they take the jobs of 
the native-born and disproportionately use government resources, without paying taxes) 
and that they are dangerous (because of the perception that they commit crimes at higher 
rates than the native-born). these charges certainly hearken back to the rhetoric against 
poor  southern  and  eastern  europeans  during  the  early  twentieth century. they  are  also 
demonstrably false.7
the nativist case against muslim immigrants also bears some resemblance to nativism 
a century ago. in general, those opposed to muslim immigration claim that this group is 

6    in  the  wake  of  9/11,  the  us  customs  service  and  the  immigration  and  naturalization  service  were 
subsumed by the department of homeland security (created in 2003) and reorganized as us immigration 
and customs enforcement. 
7   on jobs, see national academies of sciences, engineering, and medicine (2016), on taxes, see gee et al. 
(2017), and on crime, see hickman and suttorp (2008). 

227

making america 1920 again? nativism and us immigration, past and presentunassimilable: that muslims come from a culture that is too different to that of the native-
born; and that they cling to their culture, religious traditions, and language without adapting 
to american culture. by this rationale, the presence of muslim immigrants poses a threat to 
the christian identity of the united states. this echoes the similar claims about immigrants 
from china, japan, korea, and other asian countries during the 1870-1940 period, as well 
as to the anti-semitism of the same period, and even to nativist fears about catholics during 
the nineteenth century.8 additionally, muslim immigrants are perceived by nativists to be 
inherently  dangerous  because  of  their  purported  links  to  religious  extremists    a  fear 
that echoes historical fears about the potentially dangerous political affiliations of specific 
immigrant groups during the early twentieth century. as historian peter schrag (2010, 196) 
puts it, the anarchist rats and the mafiosi swimming off the ships in new york harbor a 
century ago have become arab terrorists wading across the rio grande.
certainly, anti-muslim nativism has spiked in the years since september 11, when muslims 
have become inextricably linked to the threat of terrorism in the american public sphere. 
with  this  focus  on  difference  and  danger,  nativists  group  all  muslims  together,  failing 
to account for the wide degree of cultural difference among muslims worldwide, or to 
distinguish between the tiny minority that participate in terrorist acts and the vast majority 
that do not, despite the fact that surveys of muslim american attitudes show extremely low 
levels of acceptance for religious extremism (pew research center 2007).9 
just  as  they  were  during  the  early  twentieth  century,  todays  nativists  are  vocal  and 
organized. anti-immigrant organizations such the federation for american immigration 
reform (fair) and numbersusa have been instrumental in disseminating skewed statistics 
and misinformation about immigrants and lobbying for stricter immigration legislation. 
many of todays most vociferously anti-immigrant groups are also explicitly promoting a 
racialized vision of a european america in which nonwhites are excluded from entry. 
the founder of fair, john tanton, has written and spoken admiringly of eugenics and 
eugenic policies.10 academics such as samuel huntington have lent credence to these calls 
for a whitened society (much as madison grant and the dillingham commission did at the 
turn of the twentieth century) and controversial public figures such as lou dobbs and ann 
coulter broadcast these ideas far and wide in the media, just as father coughlin did in the 
1930s. 
todays nativists, however, have an outlet that earlier generations did not: a president who 
not only seems to agree with many of their arguments, but who also stokes the flames of 
this nativism so explicitly and aggressively. trumps nativist statements are too numerous 
to count, but they tend to target undocumented immigrants and muslims. most recently, he 
announced the foundation of victims of immigrant crime engagement office (voice), 
a  subgroup  within  the  department  of  homeland  security  that  will  work  with  victims 
of  crimes  committed  by  undocumented  immigrants    thereby  emphasizing  nativist 
claims that criminalize undocumented immigrants and view them as an inherent threat to 
the majority population (kopan 2017). he has also tweeted directly about the purported 

8   for a useful overview of nativism as it relates to christianity in the united states, see payne (2017). 
9   for the perspective of a secular muslim woman who feels unable to define herself as such, see el amine 
(2017). 
10   see campos (2014, 142-44) and people for the american way (2015). 

228

journal on migration and human securitydangers of muslim immigrants, and spoken publically about the possibility of establishing 
a database for muslims in the united states, thus helping to reinforce nativist perceptions 
about this group, as well.11 

counteracting nativism: some final reflections
what can proponents of a robust immigration system do to counteract this rising tide of 
nativism? one way to do so would be to analyze and discuss the costs associated with 
nativism. the nativism of the 1870-1940 period came at a social, cultural, financial, and 
moral cost to society. the case of jewish refugees who were turned away during the second 
world war is particularly compelling when one contemplates the historical and contemporary 
contributions of americas jewish immigrants to american culture, scholarship, economy, 
and society. the same can be said for the innumerable other ethnic and national groups 
that were denied entry after 1924, or whose integration and prospects were stymied by 
other discriminatory policies. repeated deportations of mexican immigrants over the past 
century, for example, have not only traumatized deportees and their families, but have also 
produced no positive effects on wages for the native-born (clemens, lewis, and postel 
2017).
studies  of  more  contemporary  immigration  restrictions  likewise  indicate  that  nativist 
immigration policies, such as mass deportation, come at a steep cost to american society.12 
the trump administrations recent executive orders have already begun to create measurable 
costs for us colleges and universities (in the loss of tuition from immigrant students) and 
for the tourism sector, as foreign visitors are discouraged from visiting (nasiripour and 
lambert 2017; muther 2017).
importantly, however, information about the costs of nativism must be disseminated to 
a broader audience, which is a difficult challenge in americas ideologically segmented 
media landscape. indeed, there is no shortage of scholarship on the benefits of immigration, 
but the message is not resonating with large segments of american society.13 more work 
should be done to publicize the economic, social, and cultural contributions of muslim 
immigrants, undocumented workers, and other groups targeted by todays nativist policies. 
for example, a recent new york times article on the essential role of refugees in regenerating 
the economy of small towns in upstate new york illustrates how immigration could be 
reframed as something that has direct and tangible benefits for society (mckinley 2017). 
in addition, politicians, government officials, civic leaders, scholars, and journalists must 
do more to educate the public on the costs of nativism and to address the fears that underlie 
nativist beliefs. a growing effort to understand the concerns of the so-called white working 
class that were instrumental to the election of donald trump will hopefully produce more 
information on how to address and respond to nativism within that group (molyneux 2016).

11   for two relevant twitter posts by trump, see trump (2017a): interesting that certain middle-eastern 
countries agree with the ban. they know if certain people are allowed in its death & destruction!; and trump 
(2017b):  because the ban was lifted by a judge, many very bad and dangerous people may be pouring into 
our country. a terrible decision. for more on his statements about a muslim registry, see abramson (2016).
12   see, for example, warren and kerwin (2017).
13   on the benefits of immigration, see west (2011).

229

making america 1920 again? nativism and us immigration, past and presentnativism might also subside when a broader cross section of the us electorate experiences 
the  costs  of  the  new  restrictionist  measures  and  ceases  experiencing  the  benefits  of 
immigration. if immigration restrictions continue, such losses  whether in the form of 
higher cost goods and services, labor costs, cultural production, and innumerable other 
tangible and intangible benefits  will be felt more widely in the months and years to come. 
on the other hand, however, studies have shown that nativism increases during times of 
economic hardship, and so it is possible that the economic costs of immigration restrictions 
might actually fuel nativism, rather than mitigate it (goldstein and peters 2014).
demographic developments may possibly help to divert or subdue the current nativist turn, 
particularly as they impact the electorate. perhaps when those costs and benefits become 
more apparent, both immigrants and the native-born will begin to mobilize for political 
change, as was the case in california during the 1990s when the passage of proposition 
187 inspired the mexican and latino immigrants it targeted to become politically active 
and form coalitions with other immigrant groups, as well as white progressives (hemmer 
2017). latinos were widely expected to form a definitive voting bloc in 2016, and although 
the number of latino voters increased, it was ultimately not enough to elect the democratic 
presidential candidate. still, it seems safe to assume that as the number of latino voters 
increases, so too will the possibilities for political mobilization against nativist legislation 
(krogstad and lopez 2016). 
nevertheless, it is also important not to assume that progress is inevitable, and that nativism 
will decline if only the right arguments are made to the right people. unfortunately, nativism 
seems to spring anew with each new generation of americans. indeed, the very immigrants 
who were the targets of nativism in the early twentieth century held their own prejudices 
and biases about other groups. as peter schrag (2010, 140) points out, these immigrants 
often  invoked  these  [ethnic  and  racial]  stereotypes  proudly,  sometimes  affectionately, 
because it showed they were now also 100 percent american.
indeed, adopting racist and exclusionary attitudes may be one way of assimilating in a 
society that is still economically and culturally divided along racial lines. historians of 
ethnicity and immigration have demonstrated that the concept of whiteness is flexible, 
and that as some immigrant groups during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries 
came to be considered (and to consider themselves) part of the white majority, they also 
adopted the attitudes of that majority towards groups still considered to be nonwhite.14 it 
stands to reason, then, that todays immigrants  as well as their children and grandchildren 
 cannot be expected to automatically develop solidarity with other immigrant groups. 
latinos, for example, are divided along political and national lines  and even immigrants 
from the same country are sometimes divided by political developments in their homeland, 
a factor i have discussed elsewhere.15
for all of the historical and contemporary reasons discussed in this article, the task of 
overcoming american nativism is a daunting one. nativism has a long and pervasive history 
in the united states: in the words of alan kraut (2016), it is an american perennial. 
it appears that the united states is once again entering an era in which nativism drives 

14   see, for example, jacobson (1999).
15   see young (2015).

230

journal on migration and human securitynational policy and legislation. thus, it may be too much to hope for an end to nativism. 
it is perhaps more realistic to work towards preventing nativist immigration restrictions. 
at  the  same  time,  opponents  of  nativism  must  continue  to  promote  the  principles  of 
immigration  reform    reform  that  would  meet  the  needs  of americas  labor  market, 
provide a path to legal entry for immigrants with talent and promise, respond adequately 
to humanitarian needs and refugee flows, and work to legalize undocumented immigrants, 
while  discouraging  and  preventing  future  undocumented  immigration.  reforms  such 
as these would do much to combat nativism in the long run. achieving them, however, 
will require a complex and multipronged approach, and must involve long-term political 
mobilization and a more positive public discourse on immigrants and immigration. in this 
way, the united states might achieve a better future, instead of returning to its nativist past.

