how the illegal immigration 
reform and immigrant 
responsibility act of 1996 
has undermined us refugee 
protection obligations and wasted 
government resources

eleanor acer 
human rights first

olga byrne 
human rights first

executive summary
seeking asylum is a human right, enshrined in the universal declaration 
of human rights. the 1951 convention relating to the status of refugees 
(refugee  convention)  and  its  1967  protocol  relating  to  the  status  of 
refugees  (1967  protocol)  prohibit  the  united  states  from  returning 
refugees to persecution, and the 1980 refugee act set up a formal process 
for  applying  for  asylum  in  the  united  states.  however,  the  illegal 
immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 (iirira) 
created  a  barrage  of  new  barriers  to  asylum.  these  impediments  have 
blocked many refugees from accessing asylum in the united states and 
inserted  additional  layers  of  technicalities,  screening,  and  processing, 
undermining the effectiveness of the us asylum system. 
the  barriers  imposed  by  iirira  are  significant.  they  include  a  filing 
deadline on asylum applications, which prevents genuine refugees from 
receiving asylum if they cannot prove they have filed the application within 
one year of arriving in the united states. iirira also established summary 
deportation procedures, including expedited removal and reinstatement 
of removal, which block asylum seekers from even applying for asylum 
or  accessing  an  immigration  court  removal  hearing,  unless  they  first 
pass  through  a  screening  process.  finally,  iirira  imposed  mandatory 
detention on certain immigrants, including asylum seekers who are placed 
in expedited removal proceedings upon their arrival at a us port of entry. 
each of these provisions imposed new processes and procedures that have 
contributed to an increasingly ineffective immigration system. the current 
backlog in the immigration courts has reached a record high, surpassing 

 2017 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 5 number 2 (2017): 356-378half a million cases, while the backlog of affirmative asylum cases before the 
asylum division of us citizenship and immigration services (uscis) has 
increased by a factor of six in just three years. backlogs, which lead to long 
delays in adjudication, undermine system integrity as bona fide asylum 
seekers wait for years in legal limbo  some with families waiting abroad 
in dangerous and life-threatening situations  and individuals without 
meritorious claims may be encouraged to file applications to receive a work 
permit during the lengthy waiting period. 
twenty  years  later,  as  the  world  faces  the  largest  global  refugee  crisis 
since  world  war  ii,  the  asylum  barriers  injected  into  the  us  system 
under  iirira  have  proven  harmful  to  refugees,  and  detrimental  to  the 
us asylum system. this paper highlights recent research, litigation, and 
advocacy efforts that have further brought to light the rights violations 
and systemic inefficiencies generated by iirira. it concludes with a series 
of  recommendations,  calling  on  the  us  government  to  eliminate  these 
counterproductive barriers and to take steps to assure access to asylum.

i. iirira has undermined us protection of refugees and 
us treaty obligations
the  refugee  convention  prohibits  countries  from  returning  refugees  to  places  where 
their life or freedom would be threatened on account of his race, religion, nationality, 
membership  of  a  particular  social  group  or  political  opinion  (the  principle  of  non-
refoulement), and bars countries from penalizing refugees who enter a country illegally in 
search of protection. the convention also details the rights that countries should provide 
to refugees. when the united states chose to accede to the conventions protocol relating 
to the status of refugees, it committed to comply with the substantive requirements of the 
1951 refugee convention.1 yet various provisions of iirira have led the united states 
to deport refugees at risk of persecution and to penalize them due to their manner of entry. 
moreover, iiriras harsh detention policies and efforts to block access to immigration 
court hearings violate us legal obligations under the international covenant on civil and 
political rights (iccpr). this section describes how three major changes to the us asylum 
and immigration system imposed by iirira  the asylum filing deadline, the screening 
process  used  in  summary  removal  proceedings,  and  the  use  of  so-called  mandatory 
detention  undermine both refugees access to protection in the united states and us 
treaty obligations. 

a. filing deadline 

the  filing  deadline  is  a  procedural  hurdle  that  can  bar  refugees    who  by  definition 
have suffered persecution or have well-founded fears of persecution if returned to their 
countries  from being eligible to access the asylum adjudication process in the united 
states if, subject to some exceptions, they do not file an application for asylum within 

1   convention relating to the status of refugees, iv(b), arts. 31, 33, july 28, 1951, 189 u.n.t.s. 150.

357

how iirira has undermined us refugee protection obligationsone year of their last arrival in the united states. while the deadline was initially viewed 
by its proponents as a tool for weeding out fraudulent asylum cases, the us asylum and 
immigration system has many tools that are better tailored to identify and deny relief to 
fraudulent cases.2 indeed, the one-year deadline has failed to effectively identify fraud and 
has in fact served to block or delay protection to many legitimate asylum seekers. 
article 33 of the refugee convention prohibits the return of refugees to persecution, and 
article 34 calls on signatories to facilitate the assimilation and naturalization of refugees. 
the un high commissioner for refugees (unhcr) executive committee, of which the 
united states is a member, has stated that the failure to comply with technical requirements 
such  as  filing  deadlines  should  not  lead  to  an  asylum  request  being  excluded  from 
consideration (unhcr 1979). in fact, antnio guterres, former un high commissioner 
for refugees, speaking at a march 2010 event marking the 30th anniversary of the us 
refugee  act  of  1980,  described  the  filing  deadline  as  diverg[ing]  from  international 
standards and noted that it makes it more difficult for many asylum seekers to establish 
their need for protection (guterres 2010).
the deadline harms a range of refugees, who often have good reasons for not applying for 
asylum within one year of their arrival. many refugees struggle to survive after arriving 
in this country, many do not speak english, and most have little to no familiarity with 
the complexities of the us immigration system. some refugees do not know that they 
may be eligible for asylum status, and given the substantial gaps in legal representation 
for  indigent  asylum  seekers,  many  cannot  find  legal  representation  to  assist  them  with 
their applications (human rights first 2010; pistone and schrag 2001). refugees who 
suffer additional challenges, such as social stigmas and fears of raising incidents of rape 
or persecution due to sexual or gender identity, often face additional difficulties accessing 
asylum due to the filing deadline bar. and some are not even aware that persecution for 
sexual orientation or gender identity can be a basis for asylum (neilson and morris 2005). 
in a 2010 report, the asylum filing deadline: denying protection to the persecuted and 
undermining governmental efficiency, human rights first found that the filing deadline 
has  barred  refugees  who  face  religious,  political,  and  other  forms  of  persecution  from 
receiving asylum in the united states (human rights first 2010). among these refugees 
were a chinese woman who faced persecution due to her help to north korean refugees, an 
eritrean woman tortured due to her christian religion, and a gay man tortured in peru. an 
academic analysis of us department of homeland security (dhs) data, published in 2010, 
found that the filing deadline prevented dhs from granting 15,000 asylum applications, 
corresponding to over 21,000 refugees, between 1998 and 2009 alone (schrag et al. 2010, 
651,  753-54).  more  recent  figures  from  the  uscis asylum  office  indicate  that  4,221 
cases were referred by the asylum office to the immigration courts between january and 
december 2016 alone.3 

2    see acer  (2015)  on  providing  a  list  of  mechanisms  in  the  us  asylum  and  immigration  systems  for 
identifying  potential  fraud  and  ensuring  the  integrity  of  the  system,  including  for  example  mandatory 
biographical checks, mandatory biometric checks, fraud detection and national security teams, supervisory 
review, interpreter monitors, and legal penalties for applicants who file frivolous or fraudulent applications.
3    the asylum  division  publishes  quarterly  statistical  information,  including  the  number  of  affirmative 
asylum applications adjudicated, granted, referred to the immigration court, and referred due to a one-year 
filing deadline issue, on its website. see, for example uscis (2016a).

358

journal on migration and human securityrefugees who are unable to prove that they filed their asylum applications within one year 
of their arrival are either returned to their home countries, where they may face persecution, 
or may be eligible for another temporary form of protection called withholding of removal, 
which is less desirable than asylum for several reasons. ironically, withholding of removal 
requires a higher burden of proof to qualify but fails to provide the same protections as 
asylum. for one, it does not provide a path to permanent residence, keeping refugees at 
risk of deportation, detention, and prolonged instability. withholding of removal also does 
not  allow  refugees  to  petition  for  their  spouse  and  children  to  join  them  in  the  united 
states, dividing refugee families and leaving many family members stranded in dangerous 
circumstances abroad. article 23 of the iccpr  to which the united states is party  
states that [t]he family is the fundamental and natural group unit of society and is entitled 
to protection by society and the state,4 and the executive committee of the unhcr has 
repeatedly emphasized the importance of ensuring the unity of refugee families and urged 
states to adopt legislation protecting family unity.5
while  iirira  provided  limited  exceptions  to  the  filing  deadline  for  changed 
circumstances or extraordinary circumstances,6 human rights first found in its 2010 
report that these exceptions have not prevented the denial of protection to genuine refugees 
(human rights first 2010, 29-39).7 even dhs itself concluded and stated publicly at a 
georgetown university law center symposium in 2011 that the filing deadline results in 
the denial of asylum to genuine refugees, does little to uncover or deter fraud, and makes 
the overall adjudication process more difficult. in connection with the 50th anniversary 
of  the  refugee  convention  in  2011,  the  united  states  government,  under  the  obama 
administration, pledged to work with congress to eliminate the one-year filing deadline, 
though, as discussed below, the deadline remains and the united states continues to return 
genuine refugees to countries where they face persecution. 

4   international covenant on civil and political rights art. 23, dec. 16, 1966, 999 u.n.t.s. 171. the united 
states ratified the iccpr on june 8, 1992.
5    unhcr  executive  committee,  establishment  of  the  sub-committee  and  general,  conclusion  no.  1 
(xxvi),  f (1975); unhcr executive committee, family reunion, conclusion no. 9 (xxviii) (1977); 
unhcr  executive  committee,  refugees  without  an asylum  country,  conclusion  no.  15  (xxx),    e 
(1979); unhcr executive committee, family reunification, conclusion no. 24 (xxxii) (1981); unhcr 
executive committee, refugee children, conclusion no. 47 (xxxviii),  d (1987); unhcr executive 
committee, conclusion on refugee children and adolescents, conclusion no. 84 (xlviii),  b(i) (1997); 
unhcr executive committee, conclusion on international protection, conclusion no. 85 (xlix),  u-x 
(1998); unhcr executive committee, conclusion on the protection of the refugees family, conclusion 
no. 88 (l) (1999); unhcr executive committee, conclusion on local integration, conclusion no. 104 
(lvi),  n(iv) (2005).
6   immigration and nationality act  208(a)(2)(d); 8 u.s.c.  1158(a)(2)(d) (2000).
7   for example, human rights first (2010) found that refugees who were denied exceptions to the filing 
deadline include: refugees who suffered from post-traumatic stress disorder (ptsd) or depression following 
their traumatic experiences; refugees whose cases involved gender, sexual orientation, or potential social 
stigma; refugees who were waiting for conditions to improve so that they could return home; refugees who 
lacked knowledge of asylum law; refugees who lacked effective representation; and refugees who otherwise 
qualified for an exception to the filing deadline but were considered to have not filed within a reasonable 
periodof time after that exception occurred.

359

how iirira has undermined us refugee protection obligationsb.  summary  removal  procedures  fail  to  effectively  screen  for 

protection needs 
iirira  included  provisions  allowing  immigration  enforcement  officers    rather  than 
judges  to order the removal of certain individuals through processes called expedited 
removal and reinstatement of removal. these summary removal orders carry severe 
consequences and penalties, including a minimum five-year bar to reentering the united 
states, with limited options for administrative review or appeal. prior to the enactment of 
iirira, only an immigration judge could order a person removed from the united states, 
with only some minor exceptions (aclu 2014). 
expedited removal blocks individuals from even applying for asylum unless they first pass 
through a screening process. congress created this screening process as it recognized the 
importance of assuring access to refugee protection  and non-refoulement  for asylum 
seekers who have credible fears of persecution. when an individual who is subjected to 
expedited removal indicates an intention to apply for asylum or a fear of persecution and/or 
torture, the immigration officer must refer that individual for a credible fear interview, an 
interview with an asylum officer within uscis. in the credible fear interview, the individual 
must convince the asylum officer that a significant possibility exists that he or she will 
be able to demonstrate eligibility for asylum. if the asylum seeker receives a positive result 
from the credible fear interview, she or he will be referred to regular removal proceedings, 
a process under section 240 of the immigration and nationality act (ina), and may present 
his or her asylum claim before an immigration judge (siskin and wasem 2015). those 
who are not found to have a credible fear of persecution are subject to immediate removal. 
individuals  with  prior  removal  orders,  who  are  therefore  subject  to  reinstatement  of 
removal, are not eligible to seek asylum and must meet a higher standard by demonstrating 
a reasonable fear of persecution in the interview with the asylum officer. upon a positive 
finding, the individual will be permitted to apply for withholding of removal under the 
refugee  convention  and/or  the  convention against torture  (cat),  as  well  as  deferral 
of removal under cat (aclu 2014). during fiscal year (fy) 2016, in the midst of the 
refugee and displacement crisis stemming from the northern triangle countries of central 
america  el salvador, guatemala, and honduras  uscis conducted 92,990 credible 
fear interviews and 9,446 reasonable fear interviews (uscis 2016b).
multiple  reports  have  identified  a  range  of  due  process  and  implementation  concerns 
with respect to summary deportation (kerwin 2015). for example, in a comprehensive 
report issued in 2005, the bipartisan us commission on international religious freedom 
(uscirf) identified a number of serious deficiencies in the implementation of expedited 
removal, including the failure to effectively follow procedures to identify and safeguard 
individuals expressing a fear of return. for example, in more than half of the 354 interviews 
observed by uscirf researchers, officers failed to read required information relating to 
asking for protection and in 72 percent of cases, asylum seekers were not allowed to review 
and correct the form before signing it. in addition, the commission found that in 15 percent 
of cases observed involving an arriving alien who expressed fear of return to the inspector 
(12 out of 79), the individual was ordered removed without being referred for a credible 
fear interview. the commission recommended that dhs not expand expedited removal 
beyond  its  initial  creation  as  a  port  of  entry  program  before  addressing  the  systemic 

360

journal on migration and human securityflaws  that  undermined  protections  for  asylum  seekers  (uscirf  2005;  uscirf  2007). 
subsequent reports in 2007, 2013, and 2016 reinforced these findings and recommended 
further reforms to the expedited removal process (uscirf 2007; uscirf 2013; uscirf 
2016). 
in its 2016 report on expedited removal, uscirf found continuing and new concerns 
about  the  processing  and  detention  of  asylum  seekers  in  expedited  removal  including 
concerns  about  cbps  interviewing  practices,  inadequate  quality  assurance,  and  the 
skepticism or hostility of some officers towards asylum claims. uscirf also found that 
most of its 2005 recommendations had not been implemented. uscirf recommended a 
number of reforms including that dhs reiterate to all agencies and officers implementing 
expedited removal that their law enforcement mandate includes fully implementing u.s. 
laws and regulations governing the protection of individuals seeking refuge from return 
to persecution or torture, and that cbp retrain all officers and agents on their role in the 
expedited removal process, the proper procedures for interviewing non-citizens, and the 
special needs and concerns of asylum seekers and other vulnerable populations (uscirf 
2016). 
uscirf findings were confirmed by the american civil liberties union (aclu) in 2014. 
the aclu found that 55 percent of the 89 individuals interviewed for its report, all of 
whom had received a summary removal order, indicated that they were never asked by 
immigration border officials whether they had a fear of persecution (aclu 2014). others 
who were asked and indicated a fear were, according to the report, nevertheless removed 
from the united states without being referred for a credible fear screening interview. 
research  conducted  by  human  rights  watch  (hrw)  similarly  revealed  that  central 
american asylum seekers had been deported during the expedited removal process  in 
some cases, multiple times  despite having expressed a fear of persecution to border 
officials and presented seemingly meritorious claims consistent with reports of violence in 
the region, which, if the rules were being followed, should have led authorities to refer their 
cases for closer scrutiny by an asylum officer (hrw 2014). hrws review of government 
data also showed that only 1.9 percent of hondurans placed in summary proceedings were 
referred for credible fear interviews, despite growing recognition of a regional refugee 
crisis  stemming  from  violence  perpetrated  by  transnational  criminal  organizations  and 
other forms of persecution, particularly in honduras (ibid. 8; unhcr 2015).
among refugees who were wrongfully deported and deprived of their right to seek asylum 
were individuals like carla,8 a transgender woman from a central american country, 
who initially came to the united states in october 2014 after suffering rape and sexual 
violence in her home country. due to us immigration officials failure to respond to carlas 
requests for asylum, she was removed to honduras through the expedited removal process, 
without  ever  being  permitted  to  apply  for  asylum  before  an  immigration  judge.  carla 
returned to the united states in june 2015, was apprehended upon entry, and prosecuted 
for illegal reentry. after serving her criminal sentence, she was transferred to the custody of 
us immigration and customs enforcement (ice) and placed in reinstatement of removal 
proceedings. carla passed a reasonable fear interview, and while ineligible to apply for 

8   names of asylum seekers have been changed to protect privacy.

361

how iirira has undermined us refugee protection obligationsasylum due to her prior order of removal, she applied for and was granted withholding of 
removal with the assistance of pro bono counsel secured by human rights first.
those who pass the initial border screening and are referred by immigration border officials 
to an asylum officer for a credible or reasonable fear screening can face further challenges 
as  these  interviews  sometimes  fail  to  identify  individuals  with  refugee  claims. at  the 
time  expedited  removal  was  enacted,  senator  orrin  hatch  (r-ut),  who  served  on  the 
senate judiciary committee, noted that the credible fear screening was meant to be a low 
screening standard for admission into the usual full asylum process. (us senate 1996). 
however, in early 2014, uscis issued a new lesson plan for asylum officers on conducting 
fear screenings, which eliminated the above-mentioned language of senator hatch and, 
according to a report by uscirf, reemphasized the requirement that asylum seekers must 
show a nexus between their personal fear claims and a protected ground (uscirf 2016). 
 in interviews with asylum officers, uscirf reported that while it found certain aspects of 
the revised lesson plan, such as a new checklist, to be helpful in increasing knowledge of 
an asylum seekers claim, it said that the checklist leads them to develop a fuller analysis 
and record of the claim, bringing it close to the point of a full adjudication on the merits 
(uscirf 2016). in a 2014 report, human rights first expressed concern that the new plan, 
along with an accompanying memorandum, appeared to signal that asylum officers should 
apply a higher standard in credible fear interviews, treat credible fear interviews like full-
blown asylum interviews and require production of evidence that would be difficult or 
impossible for a recently detained unrepresented asylum seeker to produce at credible fear 
interviews (human rights first 2014).
notwithstanding the more stringent guidelines, there are many other reasons why asylum 
officers may incorrectly determine that an asylum seeker with a bona fide protection claim 
does not meet the relevant screening standards. us asylum law has become exceedingly 
complicated over the years, and many asylum cases involve legally complex and factually 
detailed  histories.  yet,  asylum  officers  are  making  these  difficult  determinations  in  a 
screening process with traumatized individuals who are overwhelmingly unrepresented. 
many  asylum  seekers  do  not  speak  english,  and  have  great  difficulty  communicating 
through  interpreters,  often  in  interviews  that  are  conducted  telephonically.  many  are 
recovering from difficult journeys and still suffering from the effects of their persecution. 
the overwhelming majority of  asylum seekers  do  not  have legal representation during 
credible fear interviews, and have only limited access to legal information that can help 
them to prepare.9 
for example, toni was initially found to not meet the credible fear standard  a mistake 
that was only rectified because toni, unlike the vast majority of asylum seekers subjected 

9   there is no recent, publicly available data on representation rates for credible fear or reasonable fear 
interviews  and,  to  the  authors  knowledge,  no  analysis  has  been  conducted  recently  to  ascertain  such 
representation rates. however, based on human rights firsts interviews and interactions with nonprofit 
attorneys working with detained asylum seekers across the country, it is clear that the vast majority are 
unrepresented at this initial  but critical  stage in the process of seeking asylum. moreover, overall rates 
of representation in detention  where the vast majority of fear interviews are conducted  are exceedingly 
low. a recent national study on access to counsel found that from 2007 to 2012, only 14 percent of detained 
immigrants had legal representation (eagly and shafer 2015). 

362

journal on migration and human securityto credible fear screenings, was able to secure pro bono legal representation. toni is a 
gay man with a female gender identity from el salvador who suffered severe physical 
and mental harm at the hands of the salvadoran government and other persecutors. in el 
salvador, toni had worked with a human rights organization to improve the plight of the 
lgbt community. toni was beaten by the police and eventually forced to flee el salvador 
due to death threats. after seeking protection at the us southern border in 2014, toni was 
put into immigration detention. toni was nearly deported under expedited removal without 
being  allowed  to  apply  for  asylum. the asylum  office  initially  denied tonis  credible 
fear interview, without examining any of the country conditions evidence documenting the 
extreme violence perpetrated against the lgbt community in el salvador. an immigration 
court failed to vacate this decision despite letters from lgbt human rights organizations 
explaining the risks toni would face if returned. after the intervention of pro bono counsel 
and a reconsideration request, toni was finally allowed to apply for asylum (acer 2015).
the lack of sufficient safeguards on the use of expedited removal leaves genuine asylum 
seekers  and  refugees  who  meet  us  and  international  law  refugee  standards  at  risk  of 
mistaken deportation. in pending federal litigation, 28 asylum-seeking mothers who have 
been in prolonged detention at the berks county residential center  one of three family 
immigration detention facilities in the country  are seeking federal judicial review of their 
credible fear determinations.10 the mothers, whose claims include cases of severe physical 
and sexual abuse at the hands of persecutors, and threats of abductions and violence by 
members of international criminal gangs, were interviewed for credible fear while held in 
family detention with their children (aclu 2016a). 
given the many deficiencies in the expedited removal process, including those outlined 
above, it is clear that refugees have been turned away from the united states in violation 
of the prohibition of refoulement. indeed, over the years, various studies and media reports 
have  documented  cases  of  individuals  who  were  mistakenly  returned  under  expedited 
removal (musalo et al. 2001; schmitt 2001). moreover, the nature of summary proceedings 
in itself may amount to a type of penalty which is imposed on asylum seekers due to 
their manner of entry. as james c. hathaway (2005, 408) concluded: the case is strong 
that the assignment of refugees who arrive without proper documentation to abbreviated 
procedures is in essence a penalty inflicted for irregular entry. when a summary procedure 
is resorted to not on the grounds of the substantive insufficiency of a claim, but rather 
to sanction a refugee for his or her mode of entry, such procedures take on a decidedly 
punitive character. 

c. mandatory detention and other polices undermine access to 

asylum and contravene us treaty obligations 
the  us  governments  detention  of  asylum  seekers  presents  many  barriers  to  asylum. 
detention isolates asylum seekers, often in facilities that are distant from urban centers, 
where it is often exceedingly challenging to find legal counsel, particularly for indigent 
individuals given the limited availability of pro bono legal services. moreover, expedited 
removal, as well as other us detention policies and practices, violate us human rights 

10   castro v. u.s. department of homeland security, no. 16-1339, (3d cir. 2016).

363

how iirira has undermined us refugee protection obligationstreaty  obligations.  where  asylum  seekers  are  initially  detained  for  a  limited  purpose 
 such as to verify identity  international standards require that detention be for the 
shortest time possible, with procedures in place to review custody decisions and to allow 
for release.11 detention beyond such a limited time frame often violates article 31 of the 
refugee convention as well as article 9 of the iccpr, as it can be arbitrary in the absence 
of  particular  reasons  specific  to  the  individual,  such  as  an  individualized  likelihood  of 
absconding, a danger of crimes against others or a risk of acts against national security 
(unhrc 2014). 
the  passage  of  iirira  in  1996  marked  the  beginning  of  a  massive  expansion  of 
immigration detention. iirira imposed mandatory detention on certain broad categories 
of  immigrants,  including  arriving  asylum  seekers,  who  were  subject  to  expedited 
removal processing. from 1994 to 2013, the immigrant detention system grew more than 
five-fold, as the daily detention population grew from 6,785 to more than 34,000 (mrs/
usccb and cms 2016, 162). according to reports from the wall street journal, as the 
obama administration neared the end of its term, the us immigrant detention system had 
reached a historic high, with an average daily population of approximately 45,000 (barrett 
2016).
the widespread use of expedited removal, which invokes initial mandatory detention, 
raises questions as to how immigration officers assess the need to detain to begin with. in 
2015, the inter-american commission on human rights expressed its deep concern that 
some of the responses to the increased arrival of children and families seeking protection 
at  the  us  border  had  included  both  the  use  of  expedited  removal  against  families  and 
the application of generalized and automatic detention (iachr 2015, 56). the broad 
nature of dhss application of expedited removal as a blanket policy at the border results 
in a similar blanket policy of detention, which violates article 9 of the iccpr as well as 
the prohibition against penalizing refugees for their manner of entry into a country. the 
refugee convention recognizes that asylum seekers often have no choice but to arrive at or 
enter a country of refuge without immigration documentation and should not be penalized 
as a result.12 
detention itself impedes access to asylum. as uscirf noted in its most recent report on 
the barriers imposed by expedited removal, [t]he rural locations of many of the facilities 
where asylum seekers are detained continue to make it very difficult, as a practical matter, 
for individuals to obtain legal advice (uscirf 2016, 52). a national study on access 
to  counsel,  which  analyzed  government  data  on  over  1.2  million  immigration  removal 
proceedings over a six-year period from 2007 to 2012, found that while only 14 percent 
of detained immigrants were represented, 69 percent of those who had been released from 
detention obtained counsel (eagly and shafer 2015). this disparity has a tremendous impact 
on both access to the asylum system itself as well as the likelihood of a successful case 
outcome. eagly and shafer reported that the odds were 15 times greater that immigrants 
11   convention relating to the status of refugees, arts. 31, 26, july 28, 1951, 189 u.n.t.s. 150; international 
covenant on civil and political rights art. 9, dec. 16, 1966, 999 u.n.t.s. 171. 
12   a report developed during the drafting of the convention stated, a refugee whose departure from his 
country of origin is usually a flight, is rarely in a position to comply with the requirements for legal entry 
(possession of national passport and visa) into the country of refuge (goodwin-gill 2001, 57; ecosoc 
1950, annex i-ii). 

364

journal on migration and human securitywith representation, as compared to those without, sought relief, and five-and-a-half times 
greater that they received it (eagly and shafer 2015). finding medical experts to conduct 
evaluations  to  confirm  torture  or  trauma  may  also  be  exceedingly  challenging  when 
detention centers are located in remote, rural areas (human rights first 2015a).
once asylum seekers pass out of expedited removal processing (after passing their credible 
fear screening), and into regular removal proceedings under ina section 240, they are no 
longer subject to mandatory detention. however, the procedural and practical barriers to 
release often subject asylum seekers to prolonged detention. those who have been placed 
into expedited removal proceedings after crossing the us border can request release through 
an immigration court bond hearing. but those who request protection at formal ports of 
entry are barred under current regulatory language from immigration court custody review. 
they can only potentially, if they meet the relevant criteria, be released on parole  a 
mechanism that allows dhs to release some noncitizens from detention while their removal 
proceedings are pending. since the early 1990s, us immigration authorities have laid out 
criteria that should be followed in assessing whether to continue to detain an asylum seeker 
who requests protection at a us airport or other formal border entry point (referred to as an 
arriving asylum seeker) or whether to release that asylum seeker on parole after passing 
a  screening  interview.  these  criteria  have  generally  included  sufficiently  establishing 
identity, demonstrating community ties or lack of flight risk, and posing no danger to the 
community. however, the criteria have been specified in a series of memoranda and policy 
directives, rather than in binding regulations.13 the former immigration and naturalization 
service (ins) and the dhs have declined to put release safeguards for arriving asylum 
seekers into regulations despite repeated recommendations made in 2005, 2007, and 2013 
by the bipartisan uscirf, as well as others (uscirf 2005, 8; uscirf 2007; uscirf 
2013, 1-2, 10).
through research conducted in 2016, human rights first found that many asylum seekers 
are held for the duration of their asylum cases, despite meeting criteria for release on parole 
upon a positive credible fear finding (human rights first 2016a). asylum seekers who 
sought protection at a port of entry  known as arriving asylum seekers  are often 
held in detention for the duration of their cases despite meeting criteria for release detailed 
in a 2009 ice memorandum entitled parole of arriving aliens found to have credible 
fear of persecution or torture (ice 2009). nonprofit attorneys who assist arriving asylum 
seekers reported to human rights first that ice often fails to properly apply the asylum 
parole directive, with 91 percent stating that ice denies parole in cases where asylum 
seekers appear to meet all the criteria for release. only 47 percent of the 3,505 reported 
parole decisions were granted in the first nine months of 2015, according to data released 
by ice in response to a freedom of information act (foia) request by the aclu and the 
center for gender and refugee studies. by contrast, 80 percent of arriving asylum seekers 
found to have a credible fear were granted parole from detention in fy 2012 (a period 
fairly soon after the directive went into effect in early 2010), according to government data 
provided to uscirf (uscirf 2013, 9). 
in  certain  parts  of  the  country,  there  appears  to  be  a  near  moratorium  on  parole.  for 
example,  the  stewart  detention  center  in  georgia,  which  is  the  largest  immigration 

13   see mcnary (1992), pearson (1998a), pearson (1998b), cerda (2004), and ice (2007). 

365

how iirira has undermined us refugee protection obligationsdetention center in the united states, has become a detention center for asylum seekers 
according to a local nonprofit attorney (human rights first 2016b). according to one data 
source, there were zero grants of parole at both stewart and the irwin county detention 
center  in  georgia  in  all  of  fy  2015  despite  the  fact  that  the asylum  parole  directive 
requires automatic review of all arriving asylum seekers who have been found to have 
a credible fear, and immigrants held in georgia detention centers are much less likely to 
be released on bond than immigrants who are detained elsewhere (human rights first 
2016b; southern poverty law center 2016). the immigration court located at the stewart 
detention center also has one of the lowest legal representation rates in the country, with 
a recent study finding that only six percent of 41,674 detained immigrants secured legal 
representation between 2007 and 2012 (eagly and shafer 2015). similarly in new jersey, 
human rights first found that arriving asylum seekers face tremendous challenges seeking 
parole and most appear to be detained for the duration of their proceedings. among 80 
arriving asylum seekers detained in new jersey detention centers who were represented by 
american friends service committee between february 2015 and september 2016, only 
three were granted parole. of the 40 cases that had been resolved favorably at the time 
of the report, asylum seekers spent an average of six months in detention. all 40 of these 
individuals were forced to remain in detention for the duration of their immigration court 
cases (human rights first 2016c).
the  supreme  court  heard  arguments  regarding  the  prolonged  detention  of  asylum 
seekers  and  other  immigrants  who  are  barred  from  court  custody  review  in  november 
2016 in jennings v. rodriguez.14 in that case, the court is assessing whether it violates the 
constitution and the immigration laws to subject immigrants in deportation proceedings 
to  long-term  detention  without  individualized  bond  hearings.  the  case  challenges 
the  governments  practice  of  detaining  immigrants  facing  deportation  proceedings  for 
months or years without due process, including many long-term lawful permanent residents 
and asylum seekers. the us court of appeals for the ninth circuit had ruled that the 
government must provide individualized bond hearings to assess danger and flight risk 
when detention exceeds six months, and every six months thereafter. the courts ruling 
could affect thousands of immigration detainees across the country.
asylum seekers  like all individuals  have a right to a presumption of liberty and 
generally should not be placed in detention. seeking asylum from persecution is a human 
right enshrined in the universal declaration of human rights. the refugee convention 
recognizes that asylum seekers often have no choice but to arrive at or enter a country 
of  refuge  without  immigration  documentation  and  should  not  be  penalized  as  a  result 
(goodwin-gill 2001).15 where asylum seekers are initially detained for a limited purpose 
 such as to verify identity  international standards require that detention be for the 
shortest time possible, with procedures in place to review custody decisions and to allow 
for release (acer 2010; international detention coalition 2011).16 detention beyond such a 

14   jennings v. rodriguez, no. 15-1204, (9th cir., filed oct. 17, 2016). 
15   a report developed during the drafting of the convention stated, a refugee whose departure from his 
country of origin is usually a flight, is rarely in a position to comply with the requirements for legal entry 
(possession of national passport and visa) into the country of refuge (goodwin-gill 2001; ecosoc 1950). 
16   convention relating to the status of refugees, arts. 39, 26, july 28, 1951, 189 u.n.t.s. 150; international 
covenant on civil and political rights art. 9, dec. 16, 1966, 999 u.n.t.s. 171. 

366

journal on migration and human securitylimited time frame would be arbitrary in the absence of particular reasons specific to the 
individual, such as an individualized likelihood of absconding, a danger of crimes against 
others or a risk of acts against national security (unhrc 2014).
the us practice of detaining asylum seekers, often without access even to immigration 
court  custody  hearings  and  for  prolonged  periods,  violates  the  iccpr,  a  multilateral 
treaty that the united states has ratified. article 9(1) of the iccpr provides that every 
person has the right to liberty and [n]o one shall be subjected to arbitrary arrest or 
detention. article 9(4) of the iccpr provides that anyone deprived of liberty by arrest 
or detention shall be entitled to take proceedings before a court. in october 2016, the 
un working group on arbitrary detention, in preliminary findings issued at the end of 
its visit to the united states, stated that [m]andatory detention of migrants, especially 
asylum-seekers, is against international law standards, and detention should be the result of 
individual assessment and the reasons for detention duly notified to the migrant and given 
the opportunity to challenge the detention while the detention should remain reasonable 
in term of its length (ohchr 2016). other human rights authorities, including the un 
special rapporteur on the human rights of migrants and the inter-american commission 
on human rights, have also concluded, after earlier missions to the united states, that 
the united states should provide immigration detainees with access to immigration court 
custody hearings (unga 2008; iachr 2010). 
the refugee convention provides that the united states shall not impose penalties on 
arriving refugees on account of their illegal entry or presence in the country or restrict 
the movements of such refugees unless such restriction is necessary.17 the convention 
prohibits the use of detention as a penalty or sanction for illegal entry or presence in a 
country (unhcr 2012). moreover, as refugee law scholar james c. hathaway (2005, 
421-23)  has  explained, article  31(2)  of  the  refugee  convention  prohibits  other  than 
minimalist detention to  verify identity and  circumstances of  arrival and  enjoins states 
from detaining refugees on the basis of general rules that authorize prolonged detention 
as a response to unauthorized entry. 

ii.  iirira  has  created  and  contributed  to  systemic 
inefficiencies 
in addition to undermining access to asylum, the barriers imposed by iirira  the filing 
deadline, summary removal proceedings and increased use of detention  have injected 
substantial inefficiencies into the us asylum and immigration system by inserting additional 
layers of technicalities and processing into the system and increasing the use of the costly 
tool of detention. as detailed below, these barriers have led to the waste, and diversion, of 
limited governmental staffing resources and the sharp escalation in detention expenditures 
despite the availability of more cost-efficient alternatives. 

17   united nations convention relating to the status of refugees art. 31(1), (2), july 28, 1951, 189 u.n.t.s. 
137. articles 2 through 34 of the refugee convention became binding on the united states through our 
accession to the united nations protocol relating to the status of refugees, jan. 31, 1967, 606 u.n.t.s. 267.

367

how iirira has undermined us refugee protection obligationsa. the one-year filing deadline undermines efficiency 

the  filing  deadline  undermines  the  efficiency  of  the  asylum  and  immigration  court 
adjudication systems in a number of ways. in its 2010 report, human rights first found that 
the deadline (1) delayed the resolution of asylum cases, (2) led thousands of cases that could 
have been resolved at the asylum office level to be shifted to the more costly, backlogged, 
and overburdened immigration court system, and (3) diverted time and resources at both 
the asylum office and the immigration courts, expending limited government resources 
litigating a technicality when those resources could instead be used to evaluate the actual 
merits of asylum cases or for other matters (human rights first 2010). 
likewise, an independent study conducted by academic experts found that the deadline 
caused many cases that could have been granted by the dhs-uscis asylum division 
instead to be referred into the immigration court removal system. the study, which analyzed 
dhss own data, concluded that the filing deadline bar prevented the asylum division from 
granting 15,000 asylum applications between 1998 and 2009 alone (schrag et al. 2010, 
753-55, 761). instead, due to the deadline, additional litigation at the already overstretched 
immigration court level was required for these and other cases. the resulting staff time 
and resources used could have been directed to other cases or needs. more recent figures 
from the asylum office confirm that filing deadline cases make up a large percentage of 
those cases that are referred to the immigration court. from july to december 2016, 34 
percent of all cases referred to the immigration courts were one-year filing deadline cases 
(uscis 2016a). data from the executive office for immigration review shows that once 
in immigration court, between 67 and 80 percent of cases referred by asylum officers were 
granted asylum from fy 2011 through fy 2015 (eoir 2016, k3). 
dhs ultimately concluded that the filing deadline makes the overall adjudication process 
more difficult, and a provision to eliminate the filing deadline was included in the obama 
administrations  january  2013  blueprint  for  immigration  reform,  a  series  of  proposed 
statutory reforms to improve the efficiency of the immigration adjudication system (acer 
and magner 2013, 452). a provision to eliminate the filing deadline was also included in 
the 113th congress bipartisan senate immigration reform bill (s. 744), though that bill 
was not ultimately enacted (magner 2016), and in an earlier bipartisan bill, entitled the 
refugee protection act of 2011, which was introduced in the us senate in august 2001 
by senator patrick leahy (d-vt) with a number of republican and democratic cosponsors 
(acer and magner 2013). 

b. expanded use of summary removal undermines efficiency and 

contributes to growing backlogs
the use of summary removal processes, including the expanded use of expedited removal, 
has injected multiple inefficiencies into the asylum adjudication system, creating an entire 
additional layer of preliminary screening in many cases. the decision to apply expedited 
removal to families who crossed the southern border after fleeing central america also 
diverted asylum officers and contributed to the growth of a substantial backlog in affirmative 
asylum cases. 

368

journal on migration and human securityfor many years after the enactment of iirira, the use of expedited removal was limited 
to formal ports of entry. beginning in 2002, the ins and then dhs began, step by step, to 
expand the use of this summary deportation tool. now, expedited removal is used not only 
at formal ports of entry, but also by border patrol when migrants encountered within 100 
miles of the border cannot establish physical presence in the united states during the 14-
day period preceding the encounter (cbp 2004). the total number of expedited removals 
increased from 34,624 in 2002 to 193,032 in 2013 (kerwin 2015, 217). in 2014, the obama 
administration further expanded expedited removal by applying it to families who crossed 
the southern border and sought us protection with their children  a practice that dhs 
had avoided in prior years. instead, dhs had typically placed families directly into regular 
(non--expedited) removal proceedings before an immigration judge (human rights first 
2015a). 
this massive increase in the use of expedited removal, along with an escalation in the 
numbers fleeing persecution and violence in the northern triangle, led to a sharp rise in 
the number of credible fear interviews, as well as the number of reasonable fear interviews 
stemming from the invocation of reinstatement of removal. from fy 2009 to fy 2016, the 
increasing number of credible fear and reasonable fear claims referred to uscis created 
a  significant  burden  on  the  asylum  division,  which  is  responsible  for  the  protection 
components  of  expedited  removal  and  reinstatement  of  removal.  during  fy  2012,  the 
asylum division adjudicated 13,880 credible fear interviews and 5,053 reasonable fear 
interviews (uscis 2016b). by fy 2016, those numbers rose to 92,990 credible fear and 
9,446 reasonable fear interviews (ibid.). 
the resulting need to devote asylum division staff to expedited removal and reinstatement 
of removal cases contributed to the significant backlog, and resulting delays, in affirmative 
asylum cases (uscis ombudsman 2015).18 the number of cases pending before the eight 
asylum  offices  increased  by  nearly  a  factor  of  six,  from  32,560  in  2013  to  194,986  in 
september 2016 (human rights first 2016d). the growing backlog has led to delays in 
asylum adjudications across the country. as of september 2016, the asylum office in los 
angeles, california was scheduling interviews for asylum applications filed in august of 
2011  over five years ago. all the eight asylum offices across the country are scheduling 
interviews for applications filed over two years ago.19 for example, the miami asylum 
office scheduled interviews in september 2016 for individuals who applied for asylum in 
may 2013 (human rights first 2016d). therefore, all asylum officers are processing cases 
at a rate slower than the 180-day statutory period for full initial adjudication of an asylum 
claim and far beyond the requirement that an initial interview be scheduled within 45 days 
(schrag et al. 2010, 651, 753-54).

18   growth may also be attributed to a rise in the number of affirmative asylum cases filed. the number of 
new affirmative asylum applications grew from 44,446 in 2013 to nearly 57,000 in fy 2014 and 83,254 in 
2015 (ibid.), which, according to the unhcr, is part of a global trend that reflects the increase in displaced 
people fleeing persecution, war, and deteriorating security. the asylum division received more than 115,000 
affirmative asylum applications in fy 2016 (uscis 2016a). 
19   uscis, affirmative asylum scheduling bulletin. in april 2015, uscis began publishing a monthly 
bulletin to report on the progress of scheduling interviews for affirmative asylum applications. for each 
asylum office the bulletin reports in which month and year the individuals currently being scheduled for 
interviews applied.

369

how iirira has undermined us refugee protection obligationsmoreover, as the asylum division has injected additional requirements and assessments 
into its credible fear screening process through its 2014 lesson plan and checklist. as a 
result, as discussed above, these screening interviews are approaching full-blown asylum 
interviews, albeit interviews where asylum seekers generally cannot obtain either legal 
counsel or evidence in support of their claims, given the short screening time frame. this 
increasingly duplicative expenditure of adjudicatory time is particularly wasteful given 
that expedited removal is now being used largely against a population that is fleeing severe 
persecution  and  brutal  violence. as  unhcr  has  concluded,  many  of  the  women  and 
children fleeing from the northern triangle have legitimate claims to protection (unhcr 
2015).

c. over-detention is costly and inefficient

in  the  years  since  the  enactment  of  iirira  and  its  mandatory  detention  provisions, 
the  use  of  immigration  detention  in  the  united  states  has  skyrocketed. this  escalation 
in immigration detention has led to a number of inefficiencies. for one, detention is not 
a  cost-effective  migration  management  tool. alternative  to  detention  (atd)  programs, 
which cost far less, have been proven effective in assuring immigrants compliance with 
court  appearance  obligations,  making  institutional  detention,  with  its  high  costs,  even 
more questionable  and less efficient  as a policy choice. second, due to the lack of 
safeguards in the system and the increasing overreliance on detention as a default tool, 
ice often wastes its existing detention space. instead of releasing individuals who do not 
warrant continued detention, ice often inefficiently holds many asylum seekers and other 
immigrants in costly detention facilities, and then asserts a lack of sufficient beds to detain 
other immigrants. 
the  costs  of  immigration  detention  have  risen  dramatically  since  1996.  congress  has 
annually appropriated the funds to sustain and expand the immigration detention system 
  from  $864  million in  2005  to  over  $2  billion  today. these  dramatic increases  have 
continued  and been maintained  even as criminal justice systems across the country are 
striving to transform the way they approach detention to reduce costs, improve efficiency 
and  effectiveness,  avoid  detaining  individuals  unnecessarily,  and  make  detention  itself 
more humane. 
the united states is now detaining a record number of immigrants, with an october 2016 
media report indicating the average daily population would reach 45,000  a historic high 
 in late 2016 (barrett 2016). by the summer of 2017, ice may be detaining as many as 
47,000 immigrants daily. this unprecedented jump  more than 50 percent in less than a 
year  should cause concern even among fervent proponents of detention and certainly 
begs questions as to whom the government is detaining and why.
much of the recent increase in detention appears to be fueled by a sharp increase in detention 
of asylum seekers since 2014, which corresponds to the expanded use of expedited removal 
in border areas and its application to central americans fleeing persecution and violence in 
the northern triangle. human rights first has documented this increase in us detention 
of asylum seekers in a series of reports (human rights first 2016a; human rights first 
2016b; human rights first 2016c). the number of asylum seekers sent to and held in 

370

journal on migration and human securityimmigration  detention  increased  nearly  threefold  in  recent  years,  from  15,683  in  2010 
to 44,228 in 2014. the number of asylum seekers to pass through immigration detention 
in 2016 is believed to be much higher, and exceed 100,000 for 2016 alone given uscis 
protection screening statistics.20 the exact numbers are unknown because, despite repeated 
requests for information and a statutory obligation to provide annual reports on asylum 
seekers in detention, dhs and ice have failed to release more recent statistics on their 
detention of asylum seekers. 
the  growing  population  of  incarcerated  adults  and  children  has  made  ice  the  biggest 
federal  client  of  the  private  prison  industry.  approximately  73  percent  of  immigrants 
are held in detention facilities operated by private, for-profit prison corporations, despite 
evidence that private prison companies provide lower quality services and present higher 
safety and security risks than facilities run by the government (aclu 2016b). at a cost of 
$2.2 billion annually to maintain 31,000 beds, this system costs taxpayers on average $194 
per day to detain an immigrant. 
in many cases, detention is not necessary to secure high rates of appearance by asylum 
seekers. government data shows that 98 percent of 11,426 cases involving adults with 
children whose cases were initiated in 2014 and who had obtained legal counsel were still 
in compliance with their court appearance obligations two years later (human rights first 
2015b). another analysis of individuals who had been released from detention pursuant to 
an immigration judges custody decision showed that 86 percent of 13,485 cases were in 
compliance with their appearance obligations in 2015 (trac 2016). 
much less costly atds have proven successful in ensuring appearance for immigration 
obligations. for example, the vera institute of justice piloted a program funded by the 
former ins that provided services to over 500 noncitizens, and found that 93 percent of 
asylum seekers who received intensive supervision services appeared at all of their hearings 
(golden  et  al.  1998).  in  2015,  lutheran  immigration  and  refugee  service  and  the  us 
conference of catholic bishops migration and refugee services piloted community-based 
case management models, which showed promising initial results, achieving compliance 
rates of 96 percent (44 out of 46 participants) and 97 percent (38 out of 39 participants) 
(human rights first 2015a). case management-based programs may cost only about 20 
percent the cost of detention (root 2000). however, ice devotes only a small fraction 
of its budget to alternative to detention programs and, within that budget allocation, case 
management programs have received modest, or no, government funding. instead, ice has 
relied almost entirely on technology-based atd programs, which often involve placing 
gps monitoring devices on individuals, and which have been criticized as an infringement 
on human dignity and liberty (mrs/usccb and cms 2016). 
by contrast, in the criminal justice system, critical attention has been focused on reducing 
unnecessary detention costs. for instance, the texas public policy foundation, home to 
the criminal justice reform coalition right on crime, has advocated for expanded use of 

20   as  noted  in  the  previous  section,  in  fy  2016,  the asylum  division  conducted  92,990  credible  fear 
interviews (uscis 2016a). since individuals in expedited removal are typically detained, one can assume 
that the vast majority of these interviews were related to a detained asylum seeker. in addition, ice detains 
asylum seekers who are seeking asylum defensively in regular 240 removal proceedings, as well as a small 
number of affirmative asylum seekers. 

371

how iirira has undermined us refugee protection obligationsalternatives like pretrial services for years, citing cost savings (human rights first 2014, 
15). various states, such as south carolina, kentucky, alabama, kentucky, and washington 
have cut costs in recent years by providing increased community supervision, instead of 
prison time, for certain controlled-substance offenses (henrichson and delaney 2012). 
the lack of safeguards in the us detention system, such as independent court review and the 
now systemic overreliance on detention, have led to an inefficient use of existing detention 
space. in many cases, as detailed in human rights firsts reports, ice officers continue 
to detain asylum seekers who do not need to be detained. in these cases, asylum seekers 
appear to merit release under existing ice policy directives, for instance, because they have 
sufficiently established their identities and do not present a safety or flight risk (human 
rights first 2016a). as so many beds in detention facilities are filled with individuals who 
should not be detained, ice then does not have sufficient space for others who should be 
higher enforcement priorities (barrett 2016). 
in some cases, dhs and ice have overused detention based on assumptions that are not 
backed up by hard data or evidence-based practice. for instance, dhs officials have used 
detention with the expectation that broad detention practices would serve as a deterrent 
and discourage other asylum seekers from seeking us protection. for example, as dhs 
secretary jeh johnson stated before the senate committee on appropriations on july 10, 
2014, [o]ur message to this group [of adults who brought their children with them] is 
simple: we will send you back. we are building additional space to detain these groups and 
hold them until their expedited removal orders are effectuated (johnson 2014). there is, 
however, little evidence that immigration detention is an effective deterrent to migration. in 
an amicus brief to the ninth circuit in flores v. lynch, 31 academics and social scientists 
 including several well-known scholars in the migration field  maintained that the 
detention of refugee families cannot be said to significantly impact any changes in future 
migration of families.21 other experts on global migration have similarly documented the 
lack of evidence that detention deters asylum seekers (international detention coalition 
2015). therefore, not only does such an approach fail to comport with due process and us 
treaty obligations, it also is ineffective and inefficient in achieving its main objective of 
deterrence.
ultimately, the expedited removal provisions of iirira paved the way for blanket detention 
decisions that have contributed to the swelling of the us immigration detention system. 
twenty years after the enactment of the law, the united states is detaining record numbers 
of immigrants, with little evidence that these policies promote immigration policy goals 
such as deterring unauthorized migration or ensuring appearances at court hearings.

iv. conclusion and recommendations 
ultimately legislative reform will be necessary to eliminate the onerous barriers that are 
undermining the efficiency of the us asylum system and leading refugees to be denied 
asylum or treated in ways that are inconsistent with us treaty commitments. the one year 
filing  deadline  bar  should  be  eliminated  given  its  counterproductive  impact  on  the  us 
asylum system and its harmful impact on refugees with well-founded fears of persecution. 
21   brief for appellant, flores v. lynch, no. 15-56434 (9th cir. 2016).

372

journal on migration and human securityexpedited removal should be eliminated by statute, and its use limited in the meantime, 
in  particular  against  families  with  children  and  in  areas  outside  of  formal  us  ports  of 
entry. the use of immigration detention should always be subject to safeguards that protect 
liberty and limit arbitrary detention and the wasteful overuse of detention. these safeguards 
should include independent court review, and at the very least, access to immigration court 
custody hearings  both initially and after six months of detention  and reasonable bond 
levels that indigent asylum seekers can afford to pay. 
instead of erecting costly, wasteful, and ultimately counterproductive barriers that make 
the  asylum  system  more  complex  and  difficult  for  refugees  to  navigate,  the  executive 
branch  and  congress  should  focus  on  investing  in  the  necessary  staff  and  resources  to 
assure fair and timely adjudications by the asylum division and the immigration courts. 
there is bipartisan support for addressing the backlogs and delays plaguing the asylum 
and immigration court systems. an investment in timely decision-making will ultimately 
benefit the system overall, advancing its integrity as well as protecting the lives of refugees 
and their families. 

