segmentation and the role of 
labor standards enforcement in 
immigration reform

janice fine 
rutgers school of management and labor relations

gregory lyon 
rutgers university

executive summary
despite  the  fact  that  many  low-wage,  violation-ridden  industries 
are  disproportionately  occupied  by  immigrants,  labor  standards  and 
immigration  reform  have  largely  been  treated  as  separate  pieces  of  an 
otherwise interrelated puzzle. not only is this view misguided, but this paper 
argues that strengthening labor standards enforcement would ensure that 
standards are upheld for all workers, immigrant and others. in addition, 
labor standards enforcement is instrumental to the erosion of sub-standard 
conditions  in  certain  sectors,  often  referred  to  as  the  secondary  labor 
market, that are associated with advanced market economies. ensuring 
labor  standards  are  upheld  diminishes  the  incentive  for  employers  to 
undercut  wages  by  exploiting  vulnerable  workers,  many  of  whom  are 
immigrants.  as  this  paper  argues,  strengthening  enforcement  must 
include  not  only  vertical  mechanisms,  including  strategic  enforcement 
and penalizing and criminalizing egregious and repeated labor violators, 
but  also  lateral  mechanisms,  such  as  co-enforcement  by  workers  and 
through worker and community organizations. the article illustrates the 
role of co-enforcement in labor standards through two case studies.

introduction
this  article  argues  that  domestic  labor  standards  enforcement  must  be  integrated  into 
immigration reform proposals as immigrants are often employed in industries with high 
violation rates. without the inclusion of strong labor standards enforcement as a central 
element  of  comprehensive  immigration  reform,  it  will  be  impossible  to  satisfy  labor 
shortages in ways that do not advantage unscrupulous employers and depress wages and 
working conditions for us workers. 
questions about how labor markets are constituted and composed are inherently tied to 
theories of immigration and real world immigration policy choices. nevertheless, debate 
over immigration has largely focused on issues such as border enforcement, and far less 
attention is devoted to the domestic nature of labor market standards and the extent to 

 2017 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 5 number 2 (2017): 431-451which the state is capable of conditioning, regulating, and effectively governing the labor 
market. labor standards enforcement is necessary in order to undercut firms incentives to 
exploit vulnerable immigrant workers and ensure a level playing field and equitable wages 
and working conditions for all, including immigrant, native, and naturalized workers.
we begin by considering the deterioration of workplace standards in the united states and 
the lack of effective labor standards enforcement. next, we discuss explanations for the 
deterioration and theories of the labor market with particular attention to segmentation 
theory  in  order  to  call  into  question  the  inevitability  of  a  secondary,  unstable  sector 
in  which  low-wage  workers,  many  of  whom  are  immigrants,  are  employed.  the  key 
thrust here is that the quality of workplace conditions and labor standards enforcement 
are  inherently  intertwined  and  that  preventing  the  exploitation  of  vulnerable  low-wage 
immigrant workers requires integrating into immigration reform proposals significantly 
strengthened  labor  standards  enforcement.  this  should  include:  increased  penalties  for 
violations and connecting them to registration and licensing schemes (yoon 2015); strategic 
enforcement that targets sectors with the highest underlying violation rates (weil 2010); 
and enhanced institutional capacity such as increased resources and more investigators as 
well as co-enforcement of labor standards through partnerships between state and civil 
society (fine 2015; amengual and fine 2016; fine 2017) and strong protections of the 
right  to  organize. two  case  studies  are  used  to  illustrate  the  role  of  co-enforcement  in 
enforcing labor standards and ensuring the rights of immigrant workers are upheld. 

immigration and labor conditions
a groundbreaking study of low-wage occupations in three metropolitan cities found that 
almost 26 percent of workers failed to receive the legally required minimum wage, 70 
percent did not receive legally required documentation of earnings, and of those eligible for 
overtime, a whopping 75 percent did not receive the pay they were entitled to (bernhardt, 
spiller, and theodore 2013, 817-18). many of the industries most prone to violations such 
as wage theft and unpaid overtime are also industries that are most heavily populated by 
immigrant workers (bobo 2009; waldinger 1996; capps et al. 2007). indeed, as of eight 
years ago, over half of all workers born in mexico and central america were employed 
in seven notoriously low-wage, high-violation industries: construction, restaurants, retail, 
landscaping, agriculture, food manufacturing, and building services (cbo 2010, 15). 
in some regions, the us department of labor (dol) has found that compliance with the 
fair labor standards act (flsa) fell below 50 percent in industries such as nursing homes, 
poultry processing, daycare, and restaurants. a 2013 study found that 41 percent of latino 
immigrants working in the agriculture, construction, hospitality, and poultry processing 
industries in nashville, charlotte, new orleans, southern georgia and several towns and 
cities in northern alabama had experienced wage theft (bauer 2009). most recently, a 2014 
study found that between 3.5 and 6.5 percent of all wage and salary workers in california 
and new york were paid less than the minimum wage and estimated that 300,000 workers 
a month, in every state, suffered minimum-wage violations (erg 2014).
as an example, in los angeles, many filipino immigrant workers are isolated in small 
care-home  facilities  where  they  also  reside.  it  is  a  shockingly  underregulated  industry. 

432

journal on migration and human securityworkers are responsible for washing, dressing, medicating, and feeding multiple patients 
throughout the day. they are seldom able to get more than a few hours of uninterrupted 
sleep and are rarely compensated for all the hours they work. recruiters and placement 
agencies are often part of an oppressive system that puts workers in facilities that pay 
below minimum wage and illegally deduct housing and food expenses.
at dick lee pastry, in san franciscos chinatown, organizers and investigators working 
together found that for nearly four years, seven dick lee employees had not been paid 
minimum wage, overtime, or double time compensation as required by law, and that the 
company had falsified payroll records. workers had been working six days per week on 
shifts of 11 to14 hours, receiving semimonthly wages of approximately $550, averaging 
between $3.02 and $3.91 per hour. dick lee owners sought to obstruct the investigation 
and retaliated against workers who spoke up by reducing their hours and firing one of them.
health and safety violations, including fatalities, are also at unacceptable levels. in 2013, 
an average of 88 workers died on the job every single week  more than 12 workers a 
day (afl-cio 2015). foreign-born latinos are especially vulnerable, averaging 15 deaths 
a week. many workplace injuries are preventable: in 2014 more than 6,000 occupational 
safety and health administration (osha) citations were issued to businesses failing to 
provide fall protections, over 5,000 for not communicating dangerous workplace hazards, 
4,000  for  not  having  proper  scaffolding,  and  over  3,000  for  not  providing  adequate 
respiratory protection (osha 2015). 
as  an  example,  car  wash  workers  in  los angeles  and  new york  city,  are  frequently 
found to be working without protective gear, routinely exposed to dangerous chemicals 
and getting feet crushed or fingers caught in machinery. one in 13 workers in texas is 
employed in the construction industry and the state has the fastest growing housing market 
in the united states, accounting for more new housing construction permits in the past 
few years, than new york, new jersey, pennsylvania, and illinois combined. but it is also 
the only state in the union that does not require building contractors to provide workers 
compensation and has the highest construction fatality rate in the country, along with very 
high rates of injury and wage theft. according to a 2013 university of texas study, 52 
percent of workers surveyed earned poverty-level wages and 22 percent had suffered wage 
theft. undocumented construction workers were 2.5 times more likely to experience wage 
theft and twice as likely to be injured on the job (workers defense project 2013).
there  is  little  doubt  that  workers  in  low-wage  industries  benefit  substantially  from 
unionization. an  empirical  analysis  of  15  low-wage  occupations  found  that  unionized 
workers  in  low-wage  industries  earn  more  than  16  percent  more  than  their  non-union 
counterparts and are significantly more likely to receive additional benefits (schmitt et 
al. 2008). unions have historically played a central role in setting and defending labor 
standards but private sector union coverage is at 7.3 percent (bls 2017). moreover, the 
ability of low-wage workers to unionize depends heavily on the protection of their rights 
as laborers and the enforcement of labor standards. while there are substantial benefits for 
unionizing, violations such as employer retaliation or intimidation of workers attempting to 
exercise their rights to organize are widespread (bernhardt et al. 2009, 24-25). in addition, 
immigrants are especially hesitant to voice concerns and exercise their labor rights out of 
fear of retaliation (gordon 2005; smith, avendano, and ortega 2009; gleeson 2010).

433

segmentation and the role of labor standards enforcementimmigrants  are  entering  a  domestic  labor  market  that  has  undergone  considerable 
deterioration  over  the  past  few  decades. the  erosion  of  labor  markets  and  widespread 
violations, de-unionization, and decentralized firm management practices have upended 
traditional labor markets in myriad ways (luce et al. 2014; stone 2013; weil 2014). an 
influx  of  immigrants  is  often  commonly  seen  as  undermining  labor  conditions,  yet  as 
milkman (2008) documents, de-unionization and the erosion of labor markets in the three 
industries she investigates  trucking, construction, and building services  preceded the 
arrival of immigrants. in those industries, the shift to non-union subcontracting is what led 
native workers to leave those jobs. the industries then shifted to immigrant labor, but labor 
standards in the industries had diminished. as milkman (2008) notes, immigrants tried to 
unionize by the late 1970s and 1980s, but by that time, de-unionization had penetrated so 
deeply that workers had little leverage against employers.
this deterioration of labor markets and working conditions, however, cannot be understood 
as  an  inevitable  product  of  market  forces.  much  of  the  change  has  been  shaped  by  a 
combination of firm management practices, outdated employment laws and the lack of 
effective labor standards enforcement. labor markets are subject to social, political, and 
institutional processes that inevitably include the labor laws regulating the market itself, 
employer discrimination, the actions of the state, and the mediating effects of unions and 
worker organizations (peck 1996, 11-13). 
the  well-known  gap  between  laws  and  regulations  on  the  books  intended  to  insure 
against exploitation and the implementation and enforcement of these laws, however, is 
a pervasive problem for vulnerable workers. as zatz (2008) demonstrates in delineating 
the role of law in shaping working conditions, labor protections are inherently legal and 
institutional structures, yet often circumvented through misclassification of employees as 
independent contractors and through the use of subcontracting. this problem is exacerbated 
for immigrant workers who may be particularly reluctant to raise concerns with employers 
(gordon 2005; fine 2006; smith, avendano, and ortega 2009; gleeson 2010).
a 2011 memorandum of understanding (mou) between the dol and the us department 
of homeland security (dhs) specifically addressed the importance of keeping immigration 
enforcement separate from labor standards enforcement (dol/dhs 2011). this agreement 
recognized the vital role of labor standards enforcement in its own right and both agencies 
agreed to keep labor enforcement activities and investigations separate from immigration 
enforcement. this is particularly important to ensure that immigrant workers can voice 
concerns and complaints about working conditions and exercise their labor rights without 
fear of reprisal. the mou explicitly states, effective enforcement of labor law is essential 
to  ensure  proper  wages  and  working  conditions  for  all  covered  workers  regardless  of 
immigration status (ibid., 1).
some argue that this unstable and insecure realm of the labor market is an inevitable feature 
of  modern,  advanced  economies.  due  to  demand  for  services  and  the  nature  of  labor 
markets, low-wage jobs are a natural feature of an economy that has a built-in demand for 
low-wage migrant labor. obscured, in this view, is the integrative capacity of the state as 
a force to intervene, shape, and structure domestic labor markets and the latent resources 
of societal stakeholders such as worker and community organizations in ensuring labor 
standards are upheld.

434

journal on migration and human securitysegmentation and labor: probing the inevitability of the 
secondary sector
prominent  labor  market  theorists  argued  that  modern  industrial  economies  possess  an 
inherent  demand  for  immigrant  labor  as  a  consequence  of  the  segmented  nature  of 
the labor market (piore 1979). piore argued that migration stems not from conditions in 
immigrants countries of origin such as low wages, but rather from an insatiable demand 
for low-wage labor in advanced economies. as detailed below, the need stems from three 
principal sources: structural inflation, social constraints resulting from the motivational 
bases of a hierarchical labor market, and the inherent duality of capital as a fixed factor and 
labor as a mobile and variable factor of production (ibid., 31-43).
structural inflation begins with the premise that jobs are not merely economic functions, 
as  conventional  economic  theory  assumes,  but  are  imbued  with  social  functions  as 
well. employees do not just do their jobs for the incomes they derive from them. the 
jobs employees do and the wages they earn are also indicators of social status. a variety 
of  informal  social  expectations  and  formal  institutional  mechanisms  ensure  that  wages 
correspond to the status and prestige attached to specific jobs. raising wages for those 
performing unskilled jobs at the bottom of this hierarchy would disrupt the wage-status 
equivalency that workers above the bottom expect, leading to pressure to increase their 
wages as well. an illustrative example offered by piore is that, under these constraints, the 
likelihood is very low that the owner of a restaurant would raise the wages of a dishwasher 
without raising those of the waiters or cooks. instead of raising the wage of the dishwasher, 
the owner recruits low-wage migrant labor to perform the job with little structural disruption. 
since people are assumed to work for both economic and social reasons  income and 
status    the  absence  of  the  latter  at  the  lowest  levels  of  the  job  hierarchy  presents  a 
motivational  problem  for  employers  seeking  to  fill  the  lowest  positions.  since  there  is 
naturally a bottom to any hierarchy, employers need to fill these jobs with employees who 
conceive of employment solely as a means to earn income and are unconcerned with the 
social implications for prestige or status. motivational problems do not arise at the bottom 
of the employment hierarchy among temporary migrant workers, because they are a group 
of people divorced from a social setting, operating outside the constraints and inhibitions 
that it imposes, working totally and exclusively, for money (ibid., 55). social status in the 
home country is what counts, and workers and their families measure this by how much 
money they are able to send home. 
the inherent duality of capital and labor constitutes the third source of demand for migrant 
labor (berger and piore 1980). put simply, capital is a fixed factor of production and must 
be expended on permanent and stable areas of production such as high-skilled workers 
and machinery. labor is variable and can be used by firms as a buffer to ensure sustained 
profitability by shifting the burdens of economic cycles to low-skilled workers to suffer 
the losses rather than the firm absorbing the costs. variable labor is added on the basis of 
seasonal fluctuations in demand and the result is a dual labor market that creates distinctions 
between seasonal, expendable workers, and stable, high-skilled laborers. this dualism, and 
the distinctions it confers, produces a bifurcation of the labor force itself.

435

segmentation and the role of labor standards enforcementsegmentation  theory,  as  applied  to  migration,  explicitly  considers  both  the  economic 
and social dimensions of labor and how the interplay between the two spurs demand for 
migrant labor. the application of segmentation theory to migration emerged in response to 
conventional economic theories of migration that posited that the wage differential between 
a workers home country and that which can be obtained in the destination country is the 
driving force of migration. although there are a number of empirically tenuous assumptions 
that undergird this theory (portes and rumbaut 2006), the implication is that migration 
will flow uncontrollably, fluctuating in accordance with episodic economic expansions and 
contractions characteristic of capitalist economies.
whether the flow of migration is amenable to state attempts to restrict or increase levels is 
heavily debated. marshall (2007) argues that the state is capable of regulating the flow of 
immigration and should do so by setting admission numbers based upon a determination 
of a long-term labor shortage in an industry. others argue that the migration flow is largely 
driven by market forces beyond the reach of the state and attempts to curtail it are futile 
(massey 1988). massey, durand, and malone (2002) also highlight the role of social capital 
and the process of cumulative causation that takes over once immigrants establish ties 
and networks in a country.
the states capacity to control immigration is fundamentally distinct from controlling labor 
standards in at least two respects. first, as we outline below, in domestic labor markets, 
government  authority  can  be  complemented  by  worker-based  labor  market  institutions 
that provide lateral enforcement. in domestic labor standards enforcement, unions, worker 
centers,  community  organizations,  and  high  road  firms  supply  enforcement  capacity  to 
government while in the realm of border enforcement, government acts alone. second, if 
assured of protection from retaliation, immigrant workers have an incentive to come forward 
about labor market violations and exploitation, whereas in immigration enforcement, there 
is no incentive for immigrants to call attention to their circumstances. 
according to segmentation theory, firms in host countries are the stimulus for migration, 
to which the labor market, workers and migrants alike, adapt. missing from this approach, 
however, is the constitutive capacity of the state as an actor capable of conditioning and 
governing domestic labor market conditions. to the extent that firms have an incentive to 
recruit and exploit low-wage labor, often immigrants, the state is also capable of altering 
that incentive through setting wage and hour floors and health and safety standards, and 
actively ensuring these standards are enforced across all classes of workers. 
the segmented nature of the labor market is borne out in two sectors of work  primary and 
secondary. the primary sector is characterized by stable, well-paying jobs with potential for 
advancement, while work in the secondary sector is inherently unstable, low paying, and 
often performed under poor conditions. sociological work has explored the contours of this 
secondary labor market and how immigrants have navigated the secondary labor market 
and dealt with the often explicit segmentation at the hands of firms (waldinger and lichter 
2003; waldinger 2015). however, exploitation in the labor market is not inherently tied 
to the presence or absence of immigrants as has been commonly assumed. reducing the 
number of immigrants in the labor market will not automatically diminish the exploitation 
of african americans, women, and others who have been subject to persistently unequal 
treatment by employers.

436

journal on migration and human securityviable labor standards enforcement is instrumental to eroding in essence and in practice 
the  notion  that  secondary  sectors  of  the  labor  market  are  somehow  inevitable  features 
of modern industrial societies. society can choose to value certain forms of labor more 
highly and place a premium on well-compensated employees to produce certain goods and 
services (attewell 1990; lafer 2004). businesses can choose to pay workers performing 
vital functions such as health services higher wages and enshrine fair scheduling practices. 
and, most importantly, the state can condition labor markets by strengthening the policies 
and strategies it uses to set and enforce labor standards. 
evidence  from  comparable  industrial  societies  further  militates  against  the  notion  that 
low-wage, unstable work is inherent in modern economies (alderman and greenhouse 
2014). in a comprehensive empirical analysis of low-wage work in the united states and 
europe, gauti and schmitt (2010) find vast differences in labor market conditions across 
countries. for instance, mason and saavedra (2010, 39) find that in the united states, 25 
percent of workers are engaged in low-wage work (defined as earning two-thirds of the 
national median wage), whereas in france the percentage is 11.1 percent, and in denmark 
is even lower at 8.5 percent. furthermore, greater numbers of immigrants do not result in 
larger proportions of low-wage workers. the authors note, [t]he impact of immigration 
and migrant work is filtered through national institutions. strongly inclusive industrial 
relations systems appear able to absorb current levels of immigration and migrant work 
without significant increases in the national share of low-wage work (mason and salvedra 
2010, 10). the inclusive industrial relations regime refers to formal  and sometimes 
informal  mechanisms to extend the wages, benefits, and working conditions negotiated 
by workers in industries and sectors with greater leverage to those with less bargaining 
power (appelbaum et al. 2010, 7).
the combination of formal and informal mechanisms in ensuring labor standards enforcement 
for immigrants entering the labor market is a key, but often overlooked, provision to be 
integrated into immigration reform. if the state, along with lateral enforcement with worker 
organizations and unions, effectively enforces labor standards, it erodes the incentives for 
firms to exploit vulnerable workers. in doing so, firms that depend on exploitation to keep 
wages low begin to face constraints. the pressure to uphold labor standards forestalls the 
depression of the wages of all workers as it erodes both the incentive, and the ability, to 
hold wages down through exploitative practices. in a well-functioning immigration system, 
migrant workers should not be used as a strategy for employers to evade basic labor and 
employment laws. labor standards are increasingly diminished and this is especially true 
for low-wage industries that disproportionately employ immigrants from latin america. 
calls for greater numbers of labor inspectors have been important in drawing attention to the 
diminished capacity of the state in redressing deteriorating working conditions (ilo 2006). 
exploitation of vulnerable laborers, many of whom are immigrants, must be counteracted 
by strong vertical strategic enforcement by the state (weil 2010), complemented by lateral 
enforcement by worker centers, unions, and high road firms and business associations (fine 
and gordon 2010; fine 2013; fine 2015; fine 2017; amengual and fine 2016). the state 
alone cannot ensure comprehensive labor standards enforcement as it lacks fundamental 
links to workers and their industries including the ongoing trust, communication, and daily 
presence necessary to systematically redress violation-prone industries. 

437

segmentation and the role of labor standards enforcementas the empirical work on comparable developed economies above illustrates, the persistence 
of an insecure, low-wage labor market in modern economies is far from inevitable. strong 
co-enforcement represents a substantial step toward undercutting the ability and incentives 
of firms to undercut and exploit immigrant workers. we now turn to co-enforcement and two 
cases studies that provide important examples of labor standards enforcement in practice.

labor standards and the corrective of co-enforcement
there are two dimensions of labor standards enforcement: government and society. these 
two dimensions are complementary, yet most proposals to improve enforcement consider 
only government and overlook the latent resources in society that are essential to establish 
a comprehensive labor standards enforcement regime.
vertical enforcement comes in the form of the state, whether federal, state, or local. the 
vertical enforcement of the state entails power to set and enforce labor policies.1 whds 
strategic enforcement strategy entails focusing at the top of industry structures, targeting 
entire business entities rather than individual workplaces, holding joint employers liable 
for  violations,  expanding  the  use  of  the  hot  goods  provision  of  flsa  and  ensuring 
that firms  pay  the full fines  and  penalties owed  (weil 2010).  high-risk  sectors  include 
residential construction, eating and drinking establishments (especially fast food), hotels/
motels, janitorial services, landscaping/ horticultural services, retail trade, health care and 
home health care services, domestic work and agriculture (weil 2012). complaint-based 
enforcement had long been the dominant approach taken by the federal government, but by 
2015, directed enforcement accounted for a remarkable 45 percent of investigations  an 
unprecedented percentage in whds history (dol 2017). yet, while state enforcement is 
essential, government does not have enough investigators to monitor all employer sites, nor 
is it likely to ever have an adequate number (wial 1999; bernhardt, mcgrath, and defillipis 
2008). additionally, government is unlikely to have as much information about conditions 
on the ground as workers in the workplace, and it generally lacks the relationships with 
vulnerable workers that strong organizations can build.
this is why lateral enforcement mechanisms are necessary to an effective co-enforcement 
regime  capable  of  sufficiently  protecting  workers  rights,  particularly  in  low-wage 
industries. indeed, effective deterrence in low-wage sectors necessitates co-enforcement: 
worker, worker organization, and high road firm participation in enforcement and greater 
transparency between government, workers and worker organizations. without the tacit 
knowledge that workers have about workplace practices and problems and the relationships 
of trust they have with worker organizations, government will lack the information and 
trust required for vulnerable workers to come forward. visually, this is akin to trying to 
squeeze the air out of a half-filled balloon. pressing down from above, the air is displaced. 

1   there are numerous important state policies besides strategic enforcement that can enhance labor standards 
enforcement  including:  joint  employer  liability;  permitting  investigations  with  or  without  complaints; 
strong remedies such as treble damages and attorneys fees; tying enforcement to licensing; agencies filing 
liens, garnishing wages, revoking licenses for unpaid final orders, city contract debarment, no bidding on 
new contracts until a final order paid in full; settlement agreements and compliance monitoring; increased 
resources for more robust enforcement; third party complaints; private right of actions; reinstatement and 
high penalties.

438

journal on migration and human securitytherefore, in order to contain the displacement, lateral mechanisms that surround the sides 
and abet the vertical force are necessary to ensure comprehensive coverage.
co-enforcement of labor standards thus involves a joint effort, drawing in those closest 
to the action, with the most information and the greatest incentives to ensure compliance, 
asking  them  to  partner  with  government  to  augment  its  capacity,  and  making  them 
accountable to government in the enforcement of existing labor standards and health and 
safety laws (amengual and fine 2016; anuradha and moore 2004; ayres and braithwaite 
1991; ayres and braithwaite 1992; bovaird 2007; cohen and rogers 1992; ostrom 1996; 
thomas 2012; moffitt 2012). unlike situations where government contracts with a third 
party to take over a service that had previously been delivered by a government agency, 
co-enforcement complements, rather than replaces, government enforcement. 
the following case studies of seattle and california illustrate the ways that vertical state 
enforcement  is  complemented  by  lateral  enforcement  mechanisms  embedded  in  civil 
society to hold the floor on labor standards. both cases provide compelling evidence of 
the potential for future labor standards enforcement and the role it can play in immigration 
reform more generally.

seattle and the office of labor standards

seattle  is  the  largest  city  in  king  county,  which  has  a  foreign-born  population  of 
approximately 441,000  a 64 percent increase since 2000. the foreign-born population 
has grown more than five times faster than the native-born population, with asians making 
up the largest group of foreign-born residents. a pew research center report found the 
seattle metropolitan area, which includes tacoma and bellevue, to be among the 20 areas 
with the highest populations of undocumented/unauthorized immigrants in the nation (pew 
research center september 2016). organizations that work with immigrants in seattle 
spend a significant portion of their time and resources helping workers, especially those 
employed in restaurants, construction, landscaping, and the janitorial sector, with wage 
theft cases.
the city of seattle became the first major city to adopt a $15 per hour minimum wage in 
june of 2014 (rolf 2016; rosenblum 2017). winning this wage was the most significant 
achievement of a dynamic coalition of labor, community and immigrant rights organizations, 
and progressives in city government. the seattle office of labor standards (ols) was 
established three months later. ols was only the second local labor standards enforcement 
agency in the country (san francisco is the first) and included a substantial commitment to 
lateral enforcement from the beginning, building contracts with community organizations 
into its core budget and applying racial equity frameworks to its policies and procedures. 
ols enforces six municipal ordinances: paid sick and safe time, fair chance employment, 
minimum wage, wage theft, secure scheduling, and the hotel employees health and 
safety  initiative. the  citys  vertical  enforcement  powers  are  robust. all  six  ordinances 
imbue the city with subpoena and criminal enforcement power, the ability to garnish wages, 
and the right to refuse to issue, revoke, or refuse to renew business licenses from employers 
found guilty of a violation (karina bull, pers. comm.). the minimum wage law contains 

439

segmentation and the role of labor standards enforcementstrong penalties for repeat violations as well as for retaliation, with explicit language about 
threatening to report the suspected citizenship or immigration status of an employee or a 
family member because the employee has exercised her rights under the ordinance.
the  labor  standards  community  outreach  and  education  fund  was  set  up  to  ensure 
outreach to demographic populations most likely to occupy low-wage jobs and experience 
workplace violations including female workers, workers of color, immigrant and refugee 
workers, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer (lgbtq) workers, workers with 
disabilities, and youth workers. it also identified targeted industries with low-wage workers 
and  high  rates  of  violations  including  (but  not  limited  to)  construction,  food  services 
and  drinking  places,  health  care,  home  health  care,  hotel  and  motel,  manufacturing, 
transportation and warehousing, personal and repair services, retail trade, security, building 
and grounds services, social assistance, education, and childcare.
the fund seeks to build trust with low-income worker communities so that workers are 
able to access labor standards enforcement and complaint resolution services throughout 
the city. as jenn round, one of the first ols investigators put it, it is obvious to everyone 
that most people, especially vulnerable workers, dont want to talk to government. we 
are calling workers and a lot of times, no one calls us back. it can be really hard to get 
information. we understand that we are not going to be the trusted messenger for low-
wage workers, and we need the trusted messenger. we will access more if we work with 
organizations  (jenn  round,  pers.  comm.).  ols  explicitly  states  that  it  is  establishing 
collaborative relationships with community-based organizations in order to:
 

increase  workers  knowledge  and  understanding  of  the  rights  provided  by  seattles 
labor standards through methods that are community centered, culturally relevant and 
accessible, and language specific;

  expand workers access to resources to enforce, or otherwise resolve, labor standards 

violations;

  build capacity among community organizations and service providers to provide labor 
standards services and information to a diverse range of workers, including low-wage 
earners, people of color, and immigrants and refugees; 

  foster increased collaboration between the office of labor standards and community 
organizations  serving  seattles  workers,  including  through  strategic  enforcement 
strategies.

the  funds  largest  contract  is  with  the  fair work  center,  a  nonprofit  organization  that 
was established to be a community base for workers because, in the words of its founding 
director, nicole vallestera keenan, we were passing and winning some of the most cutting 
edge laws, but workers were not seeing the benefits of that work . . . employers were 
saying maybe i will listen, and maybe i wont (nicole vallestra keenan, pers. comm.). 
the  fair  work  center  provides  know  your  rights  and  train  the  trainer  workshops 
on employment rights, including health and safety standards, wage and hour laws, and 
other labor standards. the fair work center collaborates with a set of community-based 
organizations including the latino community fund, al noor islamic community center, 
somali  community  services,  vietnamese  friendship  association,  lgbtq  allyship, 

440

journal on migration and human securitypuget sound sage, and the northwest immigrant rights project. these organizations are 
contracted to translate and provide labor standards information to workers in culturally 
appropriate, language-specific, and otherwise accessible formats and languages. they also 
provide  labor  standards  training,  labor  standards  counseling,  referral,  and/or  complaint 
resolution services to worker communities, and assist ols with identifying and training 
workers to support investigations and enforcement. the fair work collaborative estimates 
that its outreach has already touched more than 9,000 workers (fair worker cent 2016). 
the fair work centers case briefs highlight some important issues. in one situation, a 
korean immigrant who worked as an assistant to a hairdresser was working 45 hours per 
week but being paid about $1,000 a month, less than $5.50 per hour. she was misclassified 
by her employer as an independent contractor. the center also worked with a mexican 
immigrant  worker,  employed  as  a  painter  at  a  large  construction  firm,  who  was  also 
misclassified by his employer as an independent contractor and did not receive overtime 
pay. in a final example, a newly arrived refugee from somalia was offered a job as a security 
guard, but the offer was rescinded after a routine background check falsely reported that he 
had criminal convictions from another state 
casa  latina,  the  flagship  worker  center  in  seattle,  has  long  been  targeting  wage  theft 
violations. it received a $250,000 contract from ols which has made it possible for the 
organization to hire an outreach coordinator, expand its organizing efforts to a new area 
of the city, and investigate roughly quadruple the number of wage theft cases it took on in 
2015.
since  its  founding,  ols  has  received  4,599  inquiries  from  employers,  1,388  inquiries 
from  employees,  conducted  280  investigations  and  recovered  monetary  remedies  for 
272 individuals (seattle ols 2016). ols has received a high number of complaints and 
prioritizes  by  the  number  of  workers  affected,  egregiousness  of  the  violations,  income 
level of employees, size and capacity of the business, alleged harm, industries with high 
levels of underlying violations, and whether retaliation is occurring (kailin taijias pers. 
comm.; dylan orr, pers. comm.). it settles about half of its cases and closes between 8 to10 
cases per month (taijias pers. comm.). some cases involve specific settlement agreements. 
for example, in a 2016 case involving non-mcdonalds owned restaurant franchises, a 
manager was routinely penalizing workers who used the paid sick days they were entitled 
to by reducing their schedules for two weeks. the ols settlement required the employer 
to provide every worker two days of paid sick and safe time and to provide a declaration 
that employees could use these days without repercussions (jenn round, pers. comm.). 
ols also engages in compliance monitoring of every settlement agreement reached with 
an employer. 
the ols budget was dramatically increased from $1.9 million in 2016 to $5.3 million in 
2017. during this same period, funding for community organizations was raised from $1 
million to $1.5 million and contracts for business outreach were added. in march of 2017, 
the city council voted down efforts to fund ols through a new regulatory fee on business, 
choosing instead to establish a dedicated account within its general fund that uses existing 
revenue from the citys business and occupation tax to fund the agency.

441

segmentation and the role of labor standards enforcementthe integrated co-enforcement approach in seattle throws into relief the interconnected 
nature of the state and civil society organizations and workers in labor standards enforcement. 
the complementary impact of vertical and lateral enforcement has slowly begun to chisel 
away at secondary labor markets and calls into question their inevitability.

redefining labor standards enforcement in california

california has the highest number of immigrants in the united states and is confronting 
major wage theft and safety and health issues. in 2015, 27 percent of the population 
was  foreign-born  and  half  of  the  states  children  had  at  least  one  immigrant  parent. 
most of californias immigrants are from latin america (52%) or asia (39%). eight of 
every 10 immigrants (80%) in california are working-age adults (age 18 to 64), which 
means that more than a third (34%) of working-age adults in the state are immigrants 
(public policy institute of california 2017). in california, noncitizens are estimated to 
be approximately 1.6 times more likely to suffer from a minimum wage violation. the 
2014 study commissioned by the dol referenced above, estimated there were 372,000 
weekly minimum wage violations in california, representing approximately 3.8 percent 
of covered, nonexempt jobs. these violations were associated with $22.5 million in 
weekly  lost  income  (49.3  percent  of  the  earned  income  of  those  experiencing  the 
violations). lost weekly income totaled almost $28.7 million, which was 70.9 percent 
of the earned income of those experiencing violations (erg 2014). 
over  the  past  six  years,  the  broadest  implementation  of  co-enforcement  has  been 
taking  place  in  california,  following  governor  jerry  browns  appointment  as  labor 
commissioner of julie su, the former leader of the asian american legal defense fund. 
while under the previous administration, the division of labor standards enforcement 
(dlse) and the bureau of field enforcement (bofe) had a policy not to collaborate 
with community organizations, su saw these organizations as central to establishing a 
strong logic of deterrence. she met with the advocates early in her tenure, arranged for 
organizers in key sectors to make presentations to agency staff and created access to the 
field investigators whose main job was to enforce the law. 
su implemented major changes in vertical and lateral enforcement. in terms of vertical 
enforcement, her staff rewrote every intake form and removed any question that was 
indicative of immigration status. in addition, they removed questions such as, how 
much overtime are you owed? that assumed a level of legal knowledge that many low-
wage and immigrant workers did not have. su strongly believed calculating back wages 
was the responsibility of the state, not the workers. similarly, the form on employer 
retaliation activity asked, what was your protected activity? su argued that this was 
a legal term and that the agency needed to ask appropriate questions that did not assume 
knowledge that workers may not have possessed (julie su, pers. comm.).
while the labor commissioner has implemented sweeping internal changes in the way 
intakes  are  conducted,  as  well  as  investigations  and  hearings,  su  believes  that  the 
consistent turnaround in the agencys efficacy would not have been possible without 
the collaboration between the agency and community-based organization partners (su 
2016). 

442

journal on migration and human securitysu reports that working with community-based organizations is one of the more effective 
approaches  to  detecting  violations:  they  already  have  the  trust  of  the  workers,  speak 
the  language  of  workers,  understand  how  violations  occur  and  are  often  masked,  and 
[they] are willing to collaborate with us by giving us leads and helping to bridge the trust 
gap between workers and law enforcement (su 2015). su credits co-enforcement with 
community organizations with making strategic enforcement possible. investigators used 
to  conduct  randomized  sweeps,  identifying  their  targets  through  the  yellow  pages  and 
internet searches. they now work with community organizations that, because of their 
relationships  with  vulnerable  workers  in  at-risk  sectors,  know  where  the  violations  are 
occurring and how they are masked. 
as an example of targeting a highly noncompliant industry in partnership with civil society, 
su entered into a partnership with the warehouse workers resource center in the inland 
empire,  where  hundreds  of  thousands  of  immigrant  warehouse  workers  are  employed, 
many as temporary workers and independent contractors. resource center leaders briefed 
her staff on employment relations in the sector, which relied heavily on sourcing from 
unscrupulous temporary agencies that had high incidences of wage theft and subcontractors 
with high rates of safety violations. based on what they learned about staffing practices 
and  hours,  agency  investigators  created  a  new  operations  plan  to  investigate  targeted 
warehouses that were sourcing from the agencies, arriving at the workplace by 5:45 a.m. to 
speak with workers and assisting them in filing wage and hour claims, as well as meeting 
workers off-site, at local churches. 
in october 2011, working together, the labor commissioner investigated the largest walmart 
warehouse in the region, run by schneider logistics, and levied charges against two staffing 
agencies for more than $1 million in violations. that same year, workers filed a lawsuit 
in federal court against three walmart contractors and subcontractors, alleging millions of 
dollars in stolen wages over the previous 10 years. a federal judge issued several orders 
and injunctions in favor of the workers, including a temporary restraining order against a 
mass firing of workers who had filed the lawsuit. finally in 2014, the walmart contractor 
schneider agreed to pay $21 million in back pay to warehouse workers who had been 
systematically shorted on pay for years (warehouse workers united 2017).
in  august  of  2015,  after  an  investigation  uncovered  wage  theft  violations  affecting 
12  workers,  many  of  them  recent  immigrants  from  el  salvador,  su  issued  citations 
of $459,573 to a janitorial employer. the investigation and a two-year pay audit from june 
2012 to june 2014 revealed that managers threatened to fire workers who complained about 
working up to seven days in a row every week, for up to 9 hours a day, without breaks of 
any kind. some of the janitors had initially contacted the maintenance cooperation trust 
fund (mctf), a janitorial watchdog organization, about the workplace abuses and mctf 
helped them file a complaint with the labor commissioners office. janitors work is 
often  hidden  from  public  view,  which  can  lead  to  abuse  by  unscrupulous  employers.  i 
applaud  mctf  for  assisting  these  workers  in  exercising  their  labor  rights,  said  su. 
mctfs  partnership  with  my  office  has  helped  us  tremendously  in  our  effort  to  level 
the playing field for honest janitorial businesses and protect the wage floor in california 
(su 2016).the sanctions against norcal floor services include $456,073 in assessments 
for unpaid minimum wages and overtime, liquidated damages, and rest and meal period 

443

segmentation and the role of labor standards enforcementpremiums. additionally, the labor commissioner assessed $3,500 in penalties for violating 
overtime, minimum wage, rest and meal period requirements, and for failing to provide 
itemized wage statements. the janitors payments ranged from $560 to $81,915, based on 
the amount of time worked during the audit period.
su credits the agencys partnerships with labor and community organizations for helping it 
to achieve the highest amount on record of minimum wages and overtime wages assessed, 
as well as the highest amount of civil penalties for minimum wage and overtime violations 
assessed in a decade. in addition, she acknowledges the importance of partnerships that 
provide lateral enforcement to complement the agencys more efficient and targeted use 
of  inspections,  which  resulted  in  the  highest  rate  of  civil  penalty  citations  in  10  years 
(california department of industrial relations, labor, and workforce development 2013).
convinced of the substantial benefits of co-enforcement for ensuring labor standards for 
workers, in early 2017, working with the national employment law project, su approached 
the irvine foundation to support an unprecedented level of formalized co-enforcement. 
she pitched them to support proactive industry-based strategies, in particular, geographic 
areas in partnership with community groups that would focus on high-violation industries: 
restaurant, carwash, agricultural, janitorial, and residential care homes. the goal of the project 
is to build sustainable strategic enforcement system in california . . . by institutionalizing 
the public-private partnerships so they are embedded in the labor commissioners policy 
and practices, as well as those of the funded organizations (california strategic labor 
partnership proposal to the irvine foundation, unpublished data).
sus co-enforcement efforts in california involving both vertical and lateral enforcement 
have yielded real gains for workers in the low-wage, high-violation industries in which 
many  immigrants  work.  by  explicitly  reforming  vertical  enforcement  authority  and 
strategy while actively drawing on lateral enforcement mechanisms closer to workers and 
conditions on the ground in these industries, the california labor commissioner provides a 
strong and compelling illustration of co-enforcement to be emulated elsewhere.

conclusion
political debate over immigration is likely to persist into the foreseeable future. while 
the nature of the discourse and the proposals on offer will inevitably shift depending on 
partisanship,  world  events,  social  movements  and  so  on,  redressing  the  conditions  of 
the  labor  market  that  immigrants  enter  into  must  be  central.  effective  labor  standards 
enforcement is, for the reasons we have outlined this article, a crucial area of immigration 
reform that cannot be neglected in future proposals. 
in the last few years, two pieces of federal legislation  the wage theft prevention and 
wage recovery act2 and the protect our workers from exploitation and retaliation act3 
 that have been proposed in the us congress have aim to strengthen labor standards and 
take important steps toward consolidating the kind of effective enforcement outlined in this 
article. the two bills, either as standalone bills or as viable frameworks on which to build 

2   wage theft prevention and wage recovery act, h.r.4763, 114th cong. (2016).
3   protect our workers from exploitation and retaliation act, h.r.2169, 112th cong. (2011). 

444

journal on migration and human securityin future proposals, also serve as important indicators of the extent to which labor standards 
enforcement is beginning to penetrate political debate. 
in  2016,  senator  patty  murray  (d-wa)  introduced  the  wage  theft  prevention  and 
wage  recovery act.  this  bill  would  yield  substantial  improvements  by  adjusting  and 
strengthening  provisions  in  the  flsa.  specifically,  the  bill  would  amend  the  flsa 
and the portal to portal act, to double the amount of unpaid wages or unpaid overtime 
compensation workers could receive if employers violated minimum wage or maximum 
hour rules; increase to treble damages the penalty for retaliatory discrimination or discharge 
of a whistle-blowing employee; repeal the requirement that an employee consent in writing 
to become a party plaintiff in an action to recover damages from an employer; require 
employers to make certain disclosures to employees regarding their work, including a pay 
stub corresponding to work the employee performed during the applicable pay period and 
make final payments to a terminating employee for uncompensated hours the employees 
has worked; and directs the dol to refer any case involving a covered offender to the 
department of justice for prosecution. it also establishes a new fund, through the wage 
and hour division, to award grants to assist eligible entities (i.e. worker organizations, 
center, and unions) in enhancing the enforcement of wage and hour laws.
in addition to strengthening the enforcement of wage laws, ensuring immigrant workers 
can report labor law violations without fear of reprisal is another key provision to consider 
in  immigration  reform.  to  this  end,  representative  judy  chu  (d-ca)  introduced  the 
protect our workers from exploitation and retaliation act (power act) in 2011. the 
bill, in important ways, builds upon the memorandum of agreement between dhs and 
dol discussed above by ensuring immigrants are able to report labor law violations and 
assist with investigations into labor violations at the workplace. the power act would 
enable  immigrants  to  come  forward  to  report  abuse,  exploitation,  labor  law  violations, 
and serve as witnesses to workplace investigations, without fear of deportation under the 
immigration and nationality act. the bill would corroborate and solidify the agreement 
issued in the dol/dhs mou which states that, effective enforcement of labor law is 
essential to ensure proper wages and working conditions for all covered workers regardless 
of immigration status (dol/dhs 2011, 1).
in addition to these proposals, temporary worker programs often have been discussed as a 
viable approach to immigration reform. a common practice of employers has been to use the 
immigration status as leverage against workers to hold down wages. therefore, temporary 
programs must avoiding reinforcing immigrant workers vulnerability by ensuring that new 
temporary visa proposals remove every link between work and immigration status that, 
historically, employers have used to depress migrant wages and control their employees. 
temporary visa holders must possess rights equivalent to every other worker in the united 
states, and access to the same mechanisms to enforce those rights, including government 
agency enforcement, unionization, and private lawsuits. an essential aspect of any new 
temporary  worker  program  must  be  strengthening  these  enforcement  prongs  to  ensure 
that workplace rights are enforced and enforceable for all workers (future flow working 
group 2008). 
labor migration may be an unavoidable part of a globalized world, but as we have argued, 
secondary,  unstable,  low-wage  sectors  of  the  labor  market  to  which  many  immigrants 

445

segmentation and the role of labor standards enforcementare  exposed  are  not.  downward  pressure  on  wages  must  be  addressed  by  mandating 
complete labor market equality between immigrant workers and other workers, and by 
working toward effective mechanisms to enforce basic workplace laws for all workers. 
co-enforcement of labor standards that integrates strong vertical labor law enforcement 
with complementary lateral mechanisms including workers, unions, and organizations has 
yielded substantial improvements in working conditions and upheld worker rights, as seen 
in  the  cases  highlighted  above.  expanding  the  scope  of  immigration  reform  to  include 
labor standards enforcement is fundamental to ensuring that the rights of immigrants are 
upheld and all workers, immigrants or otherwise, stand on equal footing not just with each 
other, but with their employers as well. 

