the impact of externalization of 
migration controls on the rights 
of asylum seekers and other 
migrants1

bill frelick 
human rights watch

ian m. kysel 
american civil liberties union (aclu) of southern california

jennifer podkul 
kids in need of defense

executive summary
wars, conflict, and persecution have forced more people to flee their homes 
and seek refuge and safety elsewhere than at any time since the end of 
world war ii. as displaced people and other migrants increasingly move 
out of the conflict-ridden and less developed regions of their displacement 
and  into  relatively  rich  and  stable  regions  of  the  world,  the  countries 
of  destination  are  increasingly  working  to  contain  and  even  stem  the 
migration flow before it reaches their shores. perversely, countries that 
have  developed  generally  rights-sensitive  standards  and  procedures  for 
assessing  protection  claims  of  asylum  seekers  within  their  jurisdictions 
have simultaneously established barriers that prevent migrants, including 
asylum seekers, from setting foot on their territories or otherwise triggering 
protection  obligations.  consequently,  those  who  would  otherwise  have 
been able to avail themselves of asylum procedures, social support, and 
decent reception conditions are often relegated to countries of first arrival 

1billfrelickistherefugeerightsprogramdirectorathumanrightswatch;ianm.kyselisastaffattorney
at the american civil liberties union of southern california and also co-chairs the steering committee of 
the international migrants bill of rights (imbr) initiative; and jennifer podkul is the director of policy at 
kids in need of defense. the views presented here along with any errors or omissions are the authors alone. 
the authors would like to thank the georgetown law human rights institute for organizing discussion of 
these issues at the 2015 samuel dash conference on human rights and, along with its co-organizers, for 
convening further discussion in geneva, switzerland in 2015, as well as the participants in these convenings; 
becca bailis and julie kornfeld for their research assistance; human rights watch reviewers of the paper, 
benjamin ward, james ross, elaine pearson, alison parker, and daniel wilkinson; and the student attorneys 
of the federal legislation and administrative clinic at georgetown for their important contributions. finally, 
the authors would like to thank the participants in the center for migration studies rethinking the global 
refugee protection system conference in july 2016 and the editors and reviewers at the journal on migration 
and human security for their insightful comments and suggestions on drafts of this manuscript. 

 2016 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 4 number 4 (2016): 190-220or  transit  that  have  comparatively  less  capacity  to  ensure  protection  of 
human rights in accordance with international standards. 
this paper seeks to develop a working definition of the externalization of 
migration controls and how such externalization of the border implicates 
the human rights of migrants, and asylum seekers in particular. although 
the majority of those migrants seeking legal protections stay in countries 
neighboring  their  own,  hundreds  of  thousands  continue  their  journeys 
in search of protection and stability in more distant states, including in 
the  european  union,  the  united  states,  and  australia.  in  response  to 
the  significant  increase  in  asylum  seekers  arriving  at  their  borders,  all 
three  entities  have  significantly  increased  deterrence  measures  with 
the  hopes  of  keeping  new  arrivals  from  entering.  this  paper  will  thus 
highlight a number of the most troubling externalization strategies used 
by the european union, the united states, and australia. finally, because 
rights-threatening  externalization  law,  policies,  and  practices  implicate 
the  international  legal  responsibility  of  the  destination  states  pursuing 
them, the paper will conclude by presenting recommendations that could 
strengthen  protection  of  human  rights  in  the  context  of  state  actions 
seeking to manage migration.

i. introduction
as displaced people and other migrants2increasinglymoveoutoftheconflict-riddenand
less-developed regions of their displacement and into relatively rich and stable regions 
of the world, the countries of destination are increasingly working to contain and even 
stemthemigrationflowbeforethetideofthosemigratingreachestheirshores.oneof
the cruel ironies in recent years is that a number of countries that have developed rights-
sensitive  standards  and  procedures  for  assessing  protection  claims  of  asylum  seekers 
within  their  jurisdictions  have  simultaneously  established  barriers  that  prevent  asylum 
seekers from setting foot on their territories or otherwise triggering protection obligations. 
consequently, asylum seekers who would otherwise have been able to avail themselves of 
asylum procedures, social support, and decent reception conditions are often consigned to 
countriesoffirstarrivalortransitthathavecomparativelylesscapacitytoensurerightsand
process claims in accordance with international standards. 
humans migrate for a host of reasons  to escape harm or death, to reunify with family 
members, or to search for new opportunities  and these factors can evolve en route. 

2   in this essay, the term migrant is used broadly to include any person who is outside of their country of 
citizenship or, in the case of stateless migrants, their country of habitual residence. this term encompasses 
thosewhoaredisplacedbyconflict,naturaldisasterorothercauses,andalsoincludesthosewhoqualify
underrelevantinternational,regional,ornationaldefinitionsofrefugee.inlieuofrefugee,thetermasylum
seeker  is  used  throughout  to  broadly  describe  those  migrants  who  are  seeking  and  merit  humanitarian 
protections, whether under international, regional, or national law protecting refugees or other forms of legal 
protections based on risk, vulnerability, or legal status (and also to emphasize, as does refugee law generally, 
that migrants who are deserving of those protections as a matter of law have a right to them whether or not 
they have yet been formally recognized or declared to be a refugee). 

191

the impact of externalization of migration controlsrecent estimates place the total number of migrants worldwide at an all-time high and 
rising  with the latest estimates above 244 million (unfpa 2002). the number of the 
forcibly displaced  refugees, asylum seekers, and internally displaced persons  are 
also  at  historical  highs. the  overwhelming  majority  of  the  approximately  63.5  million 
people of concern to the united nations high commissioner for refugees (unhcr) at 
the close of 2015 have remained close to their places of original displacement (more than 
38 million of them remain internally displaced in their home countries; 86 percent of the 
worlds refugees, 13.9 million, are staying in the developing world) (unhcr 2016c). but 
hundredsofthousandshavemovedorareseekingtomovebeyondnearbycountriesoffirst
arrival and knocking on the doors  and sometimes pushing them open or climbing over 
and around them  of industrialized countries, principally member states of the european 
union and the united states, as well as australia, though its deterrent measures have very 
effectivelykeptnewarrivalsfromenteringinrecentyears.3 
the worlds attention has recently been seized by the drama of asylum seekers and migrants 
on overcrowded boats and at newly-erected fences on the frontiers that divide the worlds 
haves from the have-nots. from london to canberra, political leaders have suggested 
that people smugglers were responsible for enticing migrants to make their journey or, 
worse,thathumantraffickerswereforcingortrickingthemtoboardboatsortakedangerous
overland routes (frelick 2015).4 politicians argued that the tide could be stemmed by 
crackingdownonsmugglingandtraffickingcrimesyndicatesandincreasingdeterrenceto
dissuade people from migrating. some gave voice to the worst fears  that terrorists might 
poseasrefugees.otherssuggestedthatmanyofthoseatthegateswereseekingjobsrather
than asylum and were not in need or deserving of any rights protections at all. finally, 
particularlyineurope,manysaidthatevenrefugeesfleeingconflictandpersecutioncould
and should have found asylum in countries closer to home, and were moving onward not 
to seek protection but rather only in search of a better quality of life.
this essay acknowledges that the united states and most of the eu member states have 
generally been providing protection to the people on their territories with legitimate claims 
for  international  protection    once  migrants  gain  access  to  territory  and  to  asylum  or 
status determination procedures. a worrisome parallel development, however, has been 
the development by those states of a toolbox for preventing migrants, including asylum 
seekers, from reaching their territories and triggering the states international obligations. 
another, distinct problem is that migrants are removed from a states territory quickly to 
prevent access to asylum or status determination procedures.5 

3   see the discussion of australia in section iv(b), below.
4smugglingofmigrantsisgenerallydefinedastheprocurement,inordertoobtain,directlyorindirectly,
afinancialorothermaterialbenefit,oftheillegalentryofapersonintoastatepartyofwhichthepersonisnot
anationalorapermanentresident;and,[t]raffickinginpersonsisgenerallydefinedastherecruitment,
transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt of persons, by means of the threat or use of force or other forms 
of coercion, of abduction, of fraud, of deception, of the abuse of power or of a position of vulnerability or of 
thegivingorreceivingofpaymentsorbenefitstoachievetheconsentofapersonhavingcontroloveranother
person,forthepurposeofexploitation(unodc2004).
5considerationofeffortsbystatestoexpeditiouslyremoveorotherwisepreventaccesstoasylumorstatus
determination procedures for migrants within a states territory is outside the scope of this article.

192

journal on migration and human securitysectioniiofthisarticlewillsuggestaworkingdefinitionofexternalizationofmigration
controls and describe some of the ways that this phenomenon works in practice. section iii 
willbrieflydiscussthehumanrightsofmigrants,andasylumseekersinparticular,andhow
theexternalizationofmigrantcontrolsaffectstheserightsinpractice,includingthespecific
issue of the international responsibility of destination states that pursue migration-control 
externalization. section iv will highlight a number of the most troubling externalization 
strategies used by australia, the european union, and the united states. section v will 
present some recommendations that could strengthen protection of human rights in the 
contextofexternalizationofmigrationcontrolsorothereffortstomanagemigration.

ii. what is the externalization of migration controls?
externalization  of  migration  controls  describes  extraterritorial  state  actions  to  prevent 
migrants, including asylum seekers, from entering the legal jurisdictions or territories of 
destination countries or regions or making them legally inadmissible without individually 
considering the merits of their protection claims. these actions include unilateral, bilateral, 
and multilateral state engagement (see gammeltoft-hansen 2011; see also crpeau 2013), 
as  well  as  the  enlistment  of  private  actors.  these  can  include  direct  interdiction  and 
preventive policies,6 as well as more indirect actions, such as the provision of support for 
or assistance to security or migration management practices in and by third countries.7 
as migration policy has become an increasingly politicized issue, externalization is often 
deceptively framed as either or both a security imperative and a life-saving humanitarian 
endeavor rather than simply as a strategy of migration containment and control.8 control 
ofmigrationflowsiscastasanefforttopreventillegal (or irregular) immigration or 
to protect migrants from the dangers of the journey.9 10 extraterritorial actions to manage 

6   some of the most direct mechanisms have been referred to as  non-entre policies, particularly in the 
refugee and asylum context (see gammeltoft-hansen 2011; hathaway 2005).
7   in the context of migration and border externalization, it can be helpful to consider the distinctions between 
a migrants country of origin (the country or state from which a migrant departs though not always the state 
of which the migrant is a national or citizen), destination states (the migrants intended destination state) and 
third countries or countries of transit (those states through which a migrant will or intends to transit en route). 
8   as politicization of migration has occurred, it has become more common to refer to migration policies 
as  forms  of  migration  control,  which  presumes  an  inherent  security  risk  stemming  from  migration. 
contemporary migration controls frequently also criminalize migration, which reinforces states goals of 
preventing illegal immigration by emphasizing these presumed security concerns (crpeau 2013; see also 
spijkerboer 2013). 
9thetermillegalimmigrantissometimesusedbygovernmentofficialsorothersinanefforttodistinguish
between economic migrants and migrants seeking asylum or those with refugee status, therefore implying that 
economicmigrantsareallillegal.however,migrationflowsaregenerallymixed,andmigrantsthemselves
travel with mixed motives, making such simple characterizations generally inaccurate and unhelpful (see 
mattila  2000).  the  un  system  uses  the  term  irregular  migrant  to  underscore  that  migrants  have  rights 
regardlessoftheirlegalstatus(g.a.res.3449[xxx],u.n.gaor,30thsess.,u.n.doc.a/res/3449
[dec. 9, 1975]). 
10   migrants rights are implicated in key human rights laws and treaties, including: the universal declaration 
of  human  rights  (10  dec.  1948),  u.n.g.a.  res.  217 a  (iii)  (1948),  pmbl.    1  (hereinafter,  udhr); 
international covenant on civil and political rights (new york, 16 dec. 1966) 999 u.n.t.s. 171 and 1057 
u.n.t.s.  407,  entered  into  force  23  mar.  1976  [the  provisions  of  article  41  (human  rights  committee) 
entered into force 28 mar. 1979], pmbl.  2, (hereinafter, iccpr); international covenant on economic, 

193

the impact of externalization of migration controlsmigration flows are also increasingly linked to the ineffectiveness (and politicization)
ofnationalorregionalmigrationpolicies.overtime,thephenomenonhasexpandedto
commonly  include  the  systematic  enlistment  of  third  countries  in  preventing  migrants, 
including asylum seekers, from entering destination states. third countries enlisted in the 
prevention of onward movement of migrants and asylum seekers are  at least implicitly 
 encouraged to prevent migrants and asylum seekers from entering their territories or 
to  apprehend  and  return  them  (haddad  2008,  199).11  much  of  this  public  engagement 
takesplaceinthecontextoftransnationalcrime-controleffortsbystatesthatisdirected
atseekingtocounterhumantraffickingorpeoplesmuggling(andoftenconflatesthetwo)
(plaut  2015). a  prominent  example  is  law  enforcement  or  military  assistance  designed 
to stop the flow of illicit materials, such as weapons and drugs, which may have the
additional effect of sealing borders (both for exit and entry), encouraging push-backs,
increasingapprehensions,and/orreducingaccesstoprotectionmechanismsinthecontext
of apprehension and deportation practices.12 
externalization occurs through formalized migration policies and visa regimes, through 
bilateral  and  multilateral  policy  initiatives  between  states,  as  well  as  through  ad  hoc 
policies and practices. externalization policies and practices may explicitly seek to prevent 
the entry of migrants into a destination state or have only an indirect impact on migration. 
the rhetoric that provides the humanitarian rationale for externalization focuses not only 
on preventing migrants and asylum seekers from embarking on what is characterized as 
a dangerous journey, but is also framed as an exercise in capacity building for countries 
oforigin,countriesoffirstarrival,andtransitcountries(ifrc2015).whileitmaybe
questionable whether such capacity-building actions seek to improve rights protections in 
countries of origin as a humanitarian end in itself, or rather to address the root causes 
ofinternationalmigrationasameansofcontainingirregularmigrationflows,thebuilding
social and cultural rights (new york, 16 dec. 1966) 993 u.n.t.s. 3, entered into force 3 jan. 1976., pmbl.  
2 (hereinafter, icesr); international convention on the elimination of all forms of racial discrimination 
(new york, 7 mar. 1966) 660 u.n.t.s. 195, 5 i.l.m. 352 (1966), entered into force 4 jan. 1969, pmbl.  
2(hereinafter,icerd);conventionagainsttortureandothercruel,inhumanordegradingtreatment
orpunishment(newyork,10dec.1984)1465u.n.t.s.85,23i.l.m.1027(1984),asmodifiedby24
i.l.m.  535  (1985),  entered  into  force  26  june  1987,  pmbl.    2  (hereinafter  cat);  convention  on  the 
rights of the child (new york, 20 nov. 1989) 1577 u.n.t.s. 3, 28 i.l.m. 1448 (1989), entered into force 2 
sept. 1990, pmbl.  1 (hereinafter, crc); convention relating to the status of refugees (geneva, 28 july 
1951) 189 u.n.t.s. 137, entered into force 22 april 1954, art. 1a (hereinafter 1951 refugee convention); 
international convention of the protection of the rights of all migrant workers and of their families  (new 
york, 18 dec. 1990)  2220 u.n.t.s. 3, entered into force 1 july 2003 (hereinafter icrmw); amongst 
others, including regional human rights declarations and treaties.
11   haddad contends that border externalization encourages apprehension and return, rather than resettlement, 
as it assumes that most migrants can be deported (see also crpeau 2013  59, highlighting a trend in european 
migration policy as more focused on stopping irregular migrants than protecting migrants rights).
12   for example, the united states has recently given $112 million in technological assistance to mexico 
for border security. this support is being allocated to three security lines north of mexicos border with 
guatemalaandbelize.thestatedgoalistocounterhumantraffickinganddrugrunningfromtheregion.
underthemridainitiative,pillariii,theusdepartmentofstate(dos)focusessupportonmexicosefforts
toestablishasecuresouthernborder,withthestatedgoalofpermittingfreeflowoflicitgoodsandpeople
whiledeterringillicitflows.forfy2016,dosrequested$39millionformexicoundermridatoaddress
securitythreatsfromdrugtraffickingandviolentcrime.additionalfundingcomesfromtheusdepartment
ofdefense(dod)counter-drugbudget(seedos2012;seealsoisaacson,meyer,andmorales2014).

194

journal on migration and human securityofcapacityfordevelopingruleoflaw,respectforhumanrights,conflictresolution,good
governance, and humane quality of life all represent positive aspects of externalization 
(seeogata1995;seealsohaddad2005,202-02,204).whilerecognizingthatsuccessfully
addressing root causes should enable more people to choose to remain in their homes or in 
countriesoffirstarrival,capacity-buildingpoliciesandpracticescanhavetheadditional
effect, even if only indirectly, of advancing, strengthening, or rationalizing migration-
control externalization.
externalization  policies  are  often  also  pursued  with  the  stated  goal  of  assisting  third 
countries  with  migration  control  and  management.  examples  of  these  schemes  include 
policies and practices that encourage both third countries and countries of origin to prevent 
would-be migrants from migrating through incentives for individuals to remain in place 
and also through physical or legal barriers (plaut 2015); policies and practices encouraging 
migrant apprehensions (interdictions, interceptions, or turn-backs  including on the 
highseas)throughlogistical,financial,orpoliticalsupport,ordirectlyinexchangefor
aid; the development of readmission and incentive structures between third countries and 
countries of origin (hyndman and mountz 2008, 253);13financialandpoliticalsupport
ofmigrantdetentionorinterdictionpracticesbythirdcountriesoroff-shore(ibid.);and
partnerships to combat illegal (or irregular) migration or to build capacity of immigration 
or  asylum  systems  in  third  countries  (haddad  2008,  196).  externalization  policies  can 
also include measures implemented entirely through requirements imposed on the private 
sector,suchascarriersanctionsimposedontransportationfirms,andthathavetheeffect
of preventing departure or transit of migrants to destination states. in the context of forced 
migration, externalization efforts may also extend to efforts aimed at diverting asylum
seekers to third countries, such as to third-country processing centers or protected areas 
near countries of origin (andrijasevic 2010, 266).
in conjunction with and often to justify the externalization of migration controls, states 
have specifically sought to reduce access to asylum. many states have pursued a two-
prongedstrategytoreduceaccesstoasylum.onewayistopush,prod,andsometimes
payacountryoffirstarrivaloratransitstatetoseektocurbthemigrationflowthrough
itsownenforcementmeasures.thesecondlineistodeemthetransitorfirstarrivalstatea
safethirdcountryorfirstcountryofasylumthathasorcouldhaveprovidedprotection
to a refugee, and to which the person can be returned after only a cursory admissibility 
determination. 
unhcrsexecutivecommitteefirsttackledthequestionofwhichcountryisresponsible
for examining an asylum request in 1979. at that time, the executive committee issued 
a formal conclusion holding that (1) the intentions of the asylum-seeker as regards the 
country  in  which  he  wishes  to  request  asylum  should  as  far  as  possible  be  taken  into 
account and (2) asylum should not be refused solely on the ground that it could be sought 
from another state (unhcr executive committee 1979). but the same conclusion also 
said that if a person before requesting asylum, already has a connection or close links with 
anotherstate,hemayifitappearsfairandreasonablebecalleduponfirsttorequestasylum

13   examples of european border externalization include an 8.5 billion euro program through which the 
european union signs agreements with countries that agree to readmission of nationals who are illegally 
present on the territory of a member state (hyndman and mountz 2008, 266).

195

the impact of externalization of migration controlsfrom that state (ibid.). the dublin regulation in europe14 (frelick 2015) and the us-
canada safe third country agreement15 (frelick 1996) and state practice have expanded 
the scope of this conclusion in the development of the principle of safe third country as a 
basis for determining the country within a set of countries with harmonized standards that 
would be responsible for examining an asylum claim, which included a basis for ruling 
inadmissible  asylum  claims  in  countries  of  destination  (unhcr  executive  committee 
1999). 
with the safe third country concept established in international law, what is at issue in 
the context of externalization of border control is not the principle per se, but whether 
thecountryoffirstarrivalortransitis,infact,safe.thisrequiresafactualassessmentof
whetheritprovideseffectiveprotection,whichisbasedonthefollowingcriteria:

  no risk of persecution within the meaning of the 1951 convention or serious harm 

in the previous state; 

  no risk of onward refoulement from the previous state;
 

compliance, in law and practice, of the previous state with relevant international 
refugee and human rights standards, including adequate standards of living, work 
rights, health care, and education; 
access to a right of legal stay; 
assistanceofpersonswithspecificneeds;and
timely access to a durable solution (unhcr 2002).

 
 
 

in the rush to render asylum claims inadmissible on the basis of the safe third country 
concept,nominaladherencetothesecriteriahasoftenbeendeemedsufficientevenwhen
there are evident gaps between formal acceptance of principles and their realization in 
practice. in effect, asserting that a person should be denied asylum because he or she
couldhavesoughtanineffectiveformofprotectioninacountryoffirstarrivalortransit
operationalizes the externalization of migration control  and provides perhaps the starkest 
illustration of the serious threat that externalization poses to the protection of the rights of 
migrants, and of asylum seekers in particular. 

iii. the impact of border externalization on the right of 
migrants
borderexternalizationpoliciesandpracticescandirectlyaffectthehumanrightsofmigrants
andtheinternationalobligationsofstatestoprotecttheminsignificantways.
first, and perhaps most importantly, by directing migrant flows to third countries,
externalization influences the nature and duration of state legal obligations, as well
as which states are charged under international law with the protection of the rights of 

14europeancouncilregulationno343/2003of18february2003establishingthecriteriaandmechanisms
for determining the member state responsible for examining an asylum application lodged in one of the 
member states by a third-country national (dublin regulation).
15    united  states  and  canada  safe  third  country  agreement:  hearing  before  the  subcommittee  on 
immigration, border  security,  and  claims  of  the  committee of  the  judiciary,  house  of  representatives, 
117thcong.(2002),october16.

196

journal on migration and human securitymigrants.forexample,borderexternalizationmayattemptto(oreffectively)limitformal
legal obligations, including the right to seek and enjoy asylum, by preventing migrants 
from ever coming under the jurisdiction of destination states.16 
suchexternalizationpoliciesandpracticescanthenplacesignificantandunequalburdens
on third countries; often states with fewer resources are forced (in practice and by law) to 
seek to ensure the protection of migrants rights, including rights in the context of asylum.17 
when the rights of asylum seekers and migrants are violated in such third countries as 
aresultofadestinationstatesexternalizationefforts,thiscanraisecomplicatedissues
of state responsibility for both destination states and third countries. simply put, it is a 
violation of international law for states to directly support the internationally wrongful acts 
of another state. states may not knowingly aid or assist another state in the commission 
of an internationally wrongful act if the underlying act would be internationally wrongful 
if committed by the former state (ilc 2001). as a result, destination states pursuing border 
externalization strategies may come to be responsible (as a matter of international law) for 
rights violations outside of their own territory, as at a minimum they are responsible when 
they exert control over the acts of third countries.18 
second, externalization may actually trigger, directly or indirectly, one or more categories 
of  rights  violations.  regardless  of  their  status  or  location,  migrants  have  a  range  of 
fundamental rights that can be implicated by migration-control externalization practices 
and which protect migrants against abuse throughout the migration process.19 these include 
rights that are implicated during transit, including while on the high seas and over land, if 
and when detained as well as during the expulsion or deportation process.20 
inadditiontothiscoresetofrights,somemigrantsmaybecoveredbyspecificbodiesof
law that provide a higher standard of protection than is available to other migrants. for 
example, child migrants are recognized to have a special status under international law, as 
arethosefleeingrightsabusesintheircountriesofcitizenshiporhabitualresidence,such
as refugees and asylum seekers or stateless people.21 at times, migrants also encounter 

16   the right to seek and enjoy asylum is enshrined in the universal declaration of human rights and 
isaffirmedbothbyrefugeelawandgeneralhumanrightslaw(udhr,supra, art. 14). there are at least 
somecircumstancesinwhichstatepracticesuggestsadeliberateefforttolimitrightsprotectionsavailableto
migrantsthroughthewayinwhichborderexternalizationeffortsarepursued.forexample,statesmaydirect
migrationtothirdcountrieswhicharenotpartiestothe1951refugeeconvention,andthusmigrantsbenefit
from fewer formal legal protections, particularly regarding refoulement (hyndman and mountz 2008, 266).
17   this can result in unfair burden sharingwithonlylimitedpoliticalorfinancialsupport(seeatger2013,7).
18   the increasing recognition of the extra-territorial responsibility of states to fulfill their human rights
obligations, such as in hirsi jamaa and others v. italy, suggest that international law is likely to more broadly 
recognize  breaches  of  international  law  and  standards  in  the  context  of  the  externalization  of  migration 
controls.seehirsijamaaandothersv.italy,no.27765/09(ecthr,february23,2012).
19   the rights of all international migrants are derived from many bodies of law, including general human 
rightslaw;humanrightslawprotectingspecificcategoriesofpeople(e.g.,children)andwhichthusprotect
specificcategoriesofmigrants;internationallaborlaw;internationalhumanitarianlaw;andinternational
refugee law, among others. for a restatement of rights and commentaries that source their origins to various 
international treaties and the regional conventions, see imbr (2014). 
20   see, e.g., udhr, supra; iccpr, supra; and icesr, supra.
21   see the 1951 refugee convention, supra; and crc, supra.

197

the impact of externalization of migration controlssituations  during  transit  that  increase  their  vulnerability  or  trigger  the  attachment  of 
additionalrights,suchastherightsofvictimsoftraffickingorothercrimes.22 
the perilous journey undertaken by many migrants, including on the high seas, as well 
asclandestineeffortsbysometocrossincreasinglymilitarized(andsometimesclosed)
borders, can expose them to violations of the right to life and the right to seek and enjoy 
asylum and can additionally implicate their rights as victims of crime and abuse (such 
asbytraffickers)(seeunohchr2014,1-2).externalizationcanalsoincreasedemand
for both third-country resources for and interest in apprehension of migrants, and this, in 
turn, can increase the likelihood of apprehension and both the likelihood and the duration 
of detention. yet, throughout this entire process, migrants maintain fundamental rights, 
including to liberty and security of person (including a presumption against detention on 
the basis of migration status) and, if deprived of liberty and otherwise, rights against torture 
and ill-treatment.23 
in  addition  to  being  associated  with  increased  enforcement  practices  (and  detention  of 
migrants), externalization can implicate asylum rights and prohibitions against refoulement. 
all persons have the right to leave any country, including their own; refugees and asylum 
seekers also have rights to seek and enjoy asylum and not to be punished for illegally 
entering a country to do so.24 perhaps the most important obligation, that of non-refoulement, 
prohibits states from returning a refugee to territories where her or his life or freedom would 
be threatened on account of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social 
group, or political opinion. the principle of non-refoulement also prohibits states from 
returning anyone to a state in which they would be exposed to the danger of torture or cruel, 
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.25  26 in some regions and circumstances, 
those  fearing  mistreatment  are  also  protected under  human  rights  law  from  return  to  a 
broader set of harms, including generalized violence or serious deprivation of a range of 
human rights (see, e.g., unhcr 1984, part iii[3]).27 these obligations require that states 
provide migrants access to screening and examination of any refugee or asylum claims, 
includinginsituationsofmixedmigratoryflows(wherenotallmigrantsmayultimatelybe
determined to merit or require international protection) (see unhcr 2016b).28 

22 migrants may also not fall into any specific category of vulnerable group recognized by existing
international law, but there is growing recognition of various categories of survival migrants, or those 
who are forced to leave their countries of origin as a result of impacts of climate change, environmental 
degradation, natural disaster or serious economic and social distress (see betts 2010, 11; see also imbr 2014 
[recognizing, in article 4, the rights of vulnerable migrants]).
23   see, e.g., iccrr, supra art. 7, 9; cat, supra.
24   see udhr, supra art. 13; the 1951 refugee convention, supra  art. 31(1).
25   1951 refugee convention, supra art. 33; iccpr, supra art. 7; cat, supra art. 3; unhrc 1992.
26thecontentofthisrighthasbeenspecificallytiedtoarticle7oftheiccprbytheuncommitteecreated
by the treaty. also note that the cat does not have a nexus requirement; thus, the cat applies to all migrants, 
even those who do not fear persecution on a ground recognized by refugee law (cat, supra art. 1).
27   some migrants who leave their country for reasons that fall outside of refugee protection can still become 
refugees while abroad if circumstances in their country of origin change to create a well-founded fear of 
persecution (unhcr 2007a, 5). 
28   the right to seek and enjoy asylum and the refugee protection regime also provides the right to due 
process in the context of status determinations (a right which is also independently guaranteed under human 
rights law) and prohibits the use of detention as a deterrent to potential asylum seekers. 

198

journal on migration and human securityenforcementpressuresonthirdcountriescanincreasethedifficultyofcrossingborders
for asylum seekers and refugees as well as the ability to seek or access procedures for 
determining  refugee  status.  given  that  states  are  forbidden  to  practice  indirect  or 
chain refoulement  in which refugees are returned to a third territory where they face 
persecution, harm, or the serious threat of being returned to their home country or another 
territory to face persecution or torture  migration-control externalization can implicate 
the very cornerstone of the human rights regime.29 

iv. regional case studies
the united states, australia, and the european union are the primary destination states 
or regions that have engaged in deliberate externalization strategies aimed at preventing 
migrants and asylum seekers from irregularly reaching their shores. 

a. the united states

useffortstoexternalizemigrationcontrolsgobackatleasttothereaganadministration.30 
the 1981 interdiction agreement between the united states and haiti authorized the us 
coast guard to interdict haitian vessels on the high seas, detain the passengers, and return 
them to haiti.31 despite assurances in president reagans executive order that the united 
states would respect the principle of non-refoulement,usofficialsbroughtfewerthanone
dozen of the 22,651 haitians interdicted at sea between 1981 and 1990 to the united states 
to pursue asylum claims during the highly repressive duvalier dictatorships (taft-morales 
and sullivan 1993, 9). 
aseptember30,1990coupthatoverthrewhaitisfirstdemocraticallyelectedpresident,
jean-bertrand aristide, caused the number of haitians taking to boats to spike. us president 
george h.w. bush attempted to continue the reagan policy of shipboard screening, but 
ran into legal challenges alleging that the screening was inadequate.32onmay23,1992,
he issued the kennebunkport order, which threw out reagans nod to the principle of
non-refoulement, and authorized summary returns of interdicted haitians with no refugee 
screening  whatsoever.33  in  sale  v.  haitian  centers  council,  the  us  supreme  court 
countenancedthekennebunkportorderpolicyofsummaryreturnofrefugeesinterdicted
on the high seas.34 several international bodies have rejected the notion that the law of 
non-refoulement does not apply on the high seas (or extraterritorially).35 the un high 

29   states non-refoulement obligations apply to their actions within and beyond their own territory (see 
unhcr 2007b; von sternberg 2014).
30executiveorderno.12,324,46fed.reg.48,109,(1981),reprintedin8u.s.c.1182(supp.v.1981).
31   interdiction agreement between the united states of america and haiti, sept. 23, 1981, u.s.-haiti, 33 
u.s.t. 3559, 3559-60
32   haitian refugee center v. baker, 789 f. supp. 1552 (s.d. fla. 1991), revd, 949 f.2d 1109 (11th cir. 
1991), cert. denied, 112 s. ct. 1245 (1992).
33executiveorderno.12,807,57fed.reg.23,133(1992).
34   sale v. hatian centers council, 807 f. supp. 928 (e.d.n.y. 1992), cert. granted, 113 s. ct. 52 (1992).
35    see  generally,  inter-american  commission  on  human  rights,  report  no.  51/96,  decision  of  the 
commissionastothemeritsofcase10,675(march13,1997);hirsijamaaandothersv.italy,no.27765/09
(ecthr, february 23, 2012). cf. r(europeanromarightscenter)v.immigrationofficeatpragueairport,
[2004] ukhl 55.

199

the impact of externalization of migration controlscommissioner  for  refugees  called  the  sale  ruling  a  setback  to  modern  international 
refugee law (unhcr 1993). 
as widespread human rights violations continued in haiti and haitians continued to seek 
protectionintheunitedstates,theclintonadministrationbrieflytriedshipboardscreening,
but decided in july 1994 to detain interdicted haitians temporarily at the us naval base 
in guantnamo, cuba rather than summarily return them to haiti (wasem 2011, 5). they 
were not screened for refugee status but held pending their return to haiti (ibid., 4). it was 
clearly conveyed to the haitians at guantanamo that they would never be resettled in the 
united states (gordon 1994). 
president clinton extended this externalization of migration control to cuban boat and raft 
migrants as well. after a decades-long us policy of welcoming all rescued or irregularly-
arriving cubans to the united states and automatically granting them residency status, 
presidentclinton,inaugust1994,announcedthatboatpeopleandraftersfleeingcuba
would, like the haitians, be interdicted and taken to guantnamo. this new us policy 
towardcubanrafterswasconfirmedinajoint communique on migration issued by the 
cuban and us governments on september 9, 1994. the communique stated that cubans 
rescued at sea attempting to enter the united states will not be permitted to enter the 
united states, but instead will be taken to safe haven facilities outside the united states. 
in addition, the communique stated that the cuban government would take effective
measures in every way it possibly can to prevent unsafe departures using mainly persuasive 
methods(dos1994).
president george w. bush reverted to the policy of interdicting and summarily returning 
haitian boat people, including possible refugees, to haiti. when a wave of political violence 
in late february 2004 resulted in a second ouster of president aristide, and haitians once 
again took to boats, president george w. bush announced, i have made it abundantly 
clear to the coast guard that we will turn back any refugee that attempts to reach our 
shore (seper 2004).36 
theobamaadministrationhascontinuedhighseasinterdictionsandcursoryshipboard
screening. those found to have credible fears are brought to guantnamo where they 
undergoarefugeestatusdeterminationwithoutthebenefitoflegalrepresentation.thefew
who are recognized as refugees are held at guantnamo pending third-country resettlement; 
they are not considered for resettlement to the united states.37 
us  externalization  of  migration  controls  has  a  long  history  on  land  as  well.  in  1989, 
an internal us immigration and naturalization service (ins) memo called on the ins 
liaison  in  mexico  to  secure  the  assistance  of  mexico  and  central american  countries 
toslowdowntheflowofillegalaliensintotheunitedstates(frelick1991,2).injune
1989, the ins newsletter, commissioners communique, reported on cooperation with 
thegovernmentofmexicotostemtheflowofcentralamericansthroughthatcountry,
including the establishment of checkpoints along the transit corridors and the deportation 

36   remarkably, neither the white house nor the state department issued any correction to this use of the 
term refugee (frelick 2005).
37   information in this paragraph is derived from the meeting on interdiction in the caribbean, us department 
ofstate,onoctober29,2015,attendedbybillfrelick.

200

journal on migration and human securityof intercepted central americans (jones and roney 1989). while cooperation between 
usimmigrationofficialsandtheirmexicancounterpartshasebbedandflowedoverthe
years, the idea of pressuring and supporting mexico to control central american migration 
across its remote 500-mile southern border with guatemala has had a lasting appeal for us 
policymakers faced with the challenges of policing the nearly 2,000-mile us border with 
mexico. 
through  the  mrida  initiative,  a  cooperative  bilateral  security  agreement  between  the 
united states and mexico that dates from 2008,38 the us congress has appropriated about 
$2.5 billion in assistance to mexico, of which more than $1.3 billion in equipment and 
traininghasbeendeliveredtomexico,asofapril2015(seelkeandfinklea2015).one
of the four pillars of us security assistance to mexico through the mrida initiative is 
support to create a 21st century border (pillar 3). the goal is to [fa]cilitate legitimate 
commerce and movement of people while curtailing the illicit flow of drugs, people,
arms, and cash (us embassy-mexico 2014). while mrida initiative funding involves 
farmorethanmigrationcontrol,curtailingtheillicitflowof...peoplehasremained
an important priority for the united states (ibid.), as evidenced by events in the summer 
of 2014, when extreme gang violence and poverty in the central american countries of 
honduras, guatemala, and el salvador caused tens of thousands of people, many of them 
unaccompaniedminors,tofleetotheunitedstatesandmexico.
presidentobamacommittedhisadministrationtomeetingthesurgeofmigrantswithan
aggressive,unified,andcoordinatedfederalresponseonbothsidesoftheborder(white
house 2014a). he told congressional leaders that he intended surging law enforcement 
task  forces  in  cooperation  with  our  international  partners,  with  a  focus  on  stepped-up 
interdiction and prosecution (ibid.). a week later, he asked congress for an emergency 
supplemental  appropriation  of  $3.7  billion  to  comprehensively  address  this  urgent 
humanitarian situation (white house 2014b). the highest levels of us diplomacy were 
engaged to persuade mexico and the three central american source countries, el salvador, 
honduras, and guatemala, to create concrete ways that we can work together to stem the 
flowofmigrantstakingthedangeroustriptotheunitedstates(whitehouse2015a).39 
in direct response to the summer 2014 surge in unaccompanied central americans arriving 
attheusborder,theusdepartmentofhomelandsecurity(dhs)launchedoperation
coyote, which it said was designed to stem the flow of illegal central american
migration.40 the operation involved the deployment of dhs investigators to mexico and 
central america to share criminal intelligence with foreign partners and build capacity 
inhumansmugglingandhumantraffickingenforcement(hrw2016b,52).bytheend
ofmay2015,thisefforthadresultedin1,037criminalarrestsinmexicoandtheregion.41

38indecember2008,mexicoandtheunitedstatessignedthefirstletterofagreementforthemrida
initiative, a bilateral security agreement centered on four pillars: (1) disrupting capacity of organized crime 
tooperate,(2)institutionalizingcapacitytosustainruleoflaw,(3)creatingatwenty-firstcenturyborder
structure, and (4) building strong and resilient communities.
39presidentobama,vicepresidentbiden,andsecretaryofstatekerryallmetwithhighestlevelgovernment
officialsinmexicoandcentralamericaonthisissue.
40testimony by lev j. kubiak (assistant director of international operations of us immigration and
customs  enforcement)  before  the  house  subcommittee  on  border  and  maritime  security  (2015),  7-8, 
availableathttp://www.ice.gov/sites/default/files/documents/testimony/2015/150602kubiak.pdf.
41   ibid.

201

the impact of externalization of migration controlsthecongressionalresearchservice(crs)estimatedthatusdepartmentofstate(dos)
funding  for  equipment  and  training  to  support  immigration  enforcement  on  mexicos 
southern  border  would  exceed  $86.6  million  prior  to  the  enactment  of  the  fy  2015 
appropriation  (seelke  and  finklea  2015,  16).  congress  increased  the  presidents  $115 
millionrequestforfy2015mridainitiativebyanother$79million,andspecifiedthatit
was to be used for helping mexico secure its southern border and implement justice sector 
reforms(ibid.,7).significantfundingformexicanmridainitiativeprogramscontinuedin
theobamaadministrationsfy2016request.42additionalfundsalsoflowedtomexicos
militaryfromtheusdepartmentofdefenses(dod)counter-narcoticsbudgettobolster
its capacity to control mexicos southern border.43 
the  combination  of  funding  and  technical  support,  as  well  as  diplomatic  and  other 
pressures from the united states, spurred the mexican government to action. the same 
dayaspresidentobamas emergency supplemental budget request, july 8, 2014, mexican 
president enrique pea nieto announced the start of the programa frontera sur (southern 
border program). although a detailed program was never presented publicly, the mexican 
government  established  a  new  administrative  body  within  the  ministry  of  interior,  the 
officeofcoordinationforcomprehensivemigrationassistanceatthesouthernborder,to
coordinatebordercontrolandmigrationmanagement,andfederalofficialsweredesignated
to  manage  migration  policy  in  the  southern  mexican  states  of  campeche,  chiapas, 
quintana roo, and tabasco (poder ejecutivo 2014, 1, 2; monroy 2015). moreover, in 
september 2014, the new york times reported that under pressure from the united states 
...mexicoinrecentweekshastakenararesteptowardstemmingtheflowofmigrants,
sweeping[centralamericanmigrants]offtrains,settingupmoreroadwaycheckpointsand
raidinghotelsandflophouseswheretheycongregateontheirjourneynorth(villegasand
archibold 2014). 
apprehensions of non-mexican migrants along the southwestern border of the united states 
fellby57percentbetweenoctober2014andapril2015comparedtothesamemonthsthe
previous year, from 162,700 to 70,400 (nyt editorial board 2015). as early as september 
2014, when the number of central americans appearing at the us border decreased, dhs 

42   the state departments fy 2016 budget request included $39 million for the mexico economic support 
fund  to  support  the  continued  us-mexico  partnership  under  the  mrida  initiative  to  address  security 
threatsstemmingfromdrugtraffickingandviolentcrime;$81.5millionforcentralamericanregional
security initiative (carsi); $26 million for the caribbean basin regional security initiative (cbsi); $80 
million for international narcotics control and law enforcement (inl) mexico funds for the purposes of 
institutionalizing the rule of law, disrupting and dismantling criminal organizations, creating a 21st century 
border,  including  mexicos  southern  border,  and  building  strong  and  resilient  communities  through  the 
mrida initiative; $225 million for inl for carsi activities such as land border and maritime interdiction 
programs (and support[ing] civil society through access to justice[ and] protection of human rights); and 
$20millionforinlssupporttocbsitocontinueeffortstocombatillicittraffickingandorganizedcrime,
increase port and border security, and strengthen the rule of law through training and technical assistance 
(seedos2016,90-109).
43infy2011,dodprovidedmexico$50milliontoimprovesecurityalongthemexico-guatemala-
belizeborderoutof$84.7millionindodcounter-narcoticssupportfundingtomexicothatyear.dods
mexico-guatemala-belize border initiative provides training to troops patrolling mexicos southern border, 
communicationsequipment,andsupportfordevelopmentofmexicossurveillancecapacity.dodcounter-
narcotics funding for mexico continued after fy 2011with $83.5 million in fy 2012, $68.8 million in fy 
2013, and $50.8 million in fy 2014 (see seelke and finklea 2015, 17, 24; seelke and finklea 2013, 29).

202

journal on migration and human securitysecretary jeh johnson issued a press release showing the statistical drop and saying that 
the us government is pleased that the mexican government has itself taken a number of 
importantstepstointerdicttheflowofillegalmigrantsfromcentralamericaboundforthe
united states (johnson 2014).
in parallel, apprehensions of central american migrants in mexico rose by 75 percent, 
from 53,078 to 92,889 (secretaria de gobernacion 2013, 117; secretaria de gobernacion 
2014, 117; nyt editorial board 2015). mexicos national immigration institute (inm) 
reported a 79 percent increase in the number of central americans deported from mexico 
inthefirstfourmonthsof2015(stillman2015).
theusgovernmenthascharacterizedtheeffortstostemtheflowofcentralamerican
migrants to the us border as a success, and has given much of the credit for this success 
tomexicoforitsenhancedenforcementefforts.aspresidentobamasaidatajointwhite
house press conference with mexican president pea nieto on january 5, 2015:

iverymuchappreciatemexicoseffortsinaddressingtheunaccompaniedchildren
whowesawspikingduringthesummer.inpartbecauseofstrongeffortsbymexico,
including at its southern border, weve seen those numbers reduced back to much 
more manageable levels. 

(white house 2015b)
usexternalizationeffortsextendedtothecentralamericansourcecountriesaswell.in
june of 2014, honduran law enforcement units which had received funding and training 
fromthedosbureauofinternationalnarcoticsandlawenforcement(inl)launchedan
operation to intercept children and families attempting to cross the border from honduras 
into  guatemala  (jesuit  conference  2014,  2).  three  such  honduran  units  apparently 
collaboratedontwotacticaloperations,operationrescueangelandoperationcoyote
(ibid.). according to reports, all three units received equipment and special training from 
us  border  patrol,  us  immigration  and  customs  enforcement,  or  other  us  migration 
control and law enforcement entities (ibid.; honduras amuralla 2014; carcamo 2014a; 
carcamo 2014b).

b. australia

australiasmigration-controlexternalizationpolicy,calledthepacificsolution,dates
from august 2001 when the australian navy began interdicting migrants on the high seas 
(hathaway 2002; magner 2004). that month, a norwegian freighter, the tampa, rescued 
migrants from an overcrowded vessel and sought to bring them to australias christmas 
island, as the next place of safety  the proper place, according to international maritime 
law, to disembark people rescued from vessels in distress.44 after the norwegian ship captain 
defiedaustraliasorderandentereditsterritorialwaters,theaustralianmilitaryblocked
the tampaoffthecoastofchristmasisland,preventeditspassengersfromdisembarking,
and transferred them to an australian military vessel. 

44guidelinesonthetreatmentofpersonsrescuedatsea,internationalmaritimeorganization(imo)
doc. resolution msc. 167(78), annex 34, adopted by the maritime safety committee on may 20, 2004, at 
6.12-6.17. 

203

the impact of externalization of migration controlsduringtheweeks-longstand-offatsea,theaustralianparliamentpassedlegislationwith
the explicit objective of stemming the unauthorized maritime arrival of asylum seekers 
(hrw2002,12-13).amongotherprovisions,thelegislation,whichcameintoeffectinlate
september 2001, excised christmas island and other outlying territories from australian 
immigration law, thus prohibiting asylum seekers in these erstwhile australian territories 
from lodging asylum claims in australia (ibid.). 
whilethereisevidencetosuggestthataustralianofficialsexaminedtheusplaybookin
devisingthepacificsolutionandinmanyrespectsfollowedinthefootstepsoftheunited
states in its restrictive policies on asylum seekers who arrive by sea, they also added 
some new variations (magner 2004, 58). australias new twist on externalization excised 
australian territories, for immigration law purposes, by a stroke of the pen rather than 
through any extraterritorial actions, creating the sort of rights free zone that had proved 
so convenient for the united states at guantnamo (hrw 2002, 63).
duringseptemberandearlyoctober2001,australiadetainedirregularmaritimearrivals
on christmas island or on board australian naval ships and then transferred them to the 
pacific-islandcountry,nauru,ortopapuanewguinea,wheretheywereconfinedincamps.
(ibid., 12-13). at the time, nauru was not a party to the 1951 refugee convention and 
papua new guinea, though a party to the convention, had attached numerous reservations 
totheiraccessionanddidnothaveinplaceadequatelawsandstructurestoprovideeffective
protectiontorefugeesandasylumseekers(unhcr2010).australianimmigrationofficials
conducted refugee status determinations in nauru and papua new guinea but not for the 
purpose of granting asylum under australian law, but rather  as the united states was 
doing at guantnamo  to consider recognized refugees for discretionary resettlement; 
the asylum seekers in nauru and papua new guinea had no recourse under any national 
law to challenge the refugee status determinations (hrw 2002, 62-65). 
inlateoctober2001,australiaalsobeganinterdictingmigrantboatsandforciblyreturned
themtoindonesianwaters.indonesiawasnotified,butnospecificreceptionarrangements
were made and no agreement was in place guaranteeing the protection of the intercepted 
refugees from refoulement (ibid., 12-13).
refugee  processing  was  closed  at  manus  island  in  2004  and  at  nauru  in  2008.  nauru 
became a party to the refugee convention in 2011, but lacked the capacity to provide 
effectiveasylumproceduresandrefugeeprotection(unhcr2012b,38).45 
in july 2011 australia announced an arrangement to transfer irregular maritime asylum 
seekerstomalaysia,butaustraliashighcourthaltedthatplan,findingittobeprocedurally
invalid because of malaysias poor refugee protections and the risk of refoulement (phillips 
2014).46  the  high  court  ruling  ended  the  malaysia  deal,  but  the  parliament  scrapped 
the provision of the migration act upon which the high court had based its ruling, and 
switcheditsoffshoreprocessingschemeawayfrommalaysia,notapartytotherefugee

45   [t]here areno experienced refugee status determination decision makers in the government of nauru 
[and]nopoolofpersonsidentifiedtodotheindependentreviewsonthetribunalsenvisagedbytherecently
enacted refugee convention act of 2012. 
46plaintiffm70/2011v.ministerforimmigrationandcitizenship;plaintiffm106of2011v.ministerfor
immigration and citizenship (2011) 244 clr 144.

204

journal on migration and human securityconvention,  and  back  to  nauru  and  papua  new  guinea,  both  nominally  parties  to  the 
convention. 
inaugust2012,theoffshoreprocessingandothermeasuresbillauthorizedthegovernment
to transfer irregular migrants arriving by sea to nauru or to manus island, papua new 
guinea,wheretheywouldbeheldindefinitelywhiletheirrefugeeclaimswereprocessed
(hrw 2012). the legislation targeted only those asylum seekers who arrived irregularly 
by boat (ibid.). under the law, the claims of asylum seekers who arrived by air, even with 
improper documents, would continue to be processed while they remained in australia 
(ibid).onjuly19,2013,primeministerkevinruddannouncedthatallirregularmaritime
asylum seekers would be sent to manus and nauru for processing and that none found to 
be refugees would be resettled to australia (parliament of australia 2014).
in  december  2014,  the  australian  parliament  passed  legislation  that  removed  most 
