safe and voluntary refugee 
repatriation: from principle to 
practice

jeff crisp
university of oxford

katy long
university of edinburgh

executive summary
the article discusses the principles of voluntariness, safety, and dignity in 
the context of refugee repatriation. it begins by setting out the applicable 
legal framework, and discusses how that framework has been elaborated 
upon and refined since 1951. the article then discusses how the principles 
of voluntariness, safety, and dignity have, in practice, been applied (or, 
in a few unfortunate cases, ignored). after noting that we are now living 
in an era of protracted refugee emergencies, the article concludes with a 
number of recommendations regarding alternatives to repatriation and the 
conditions under which repatriation can take place without offense to the 
principles of voluntariness, safety, and dignity.

i. introduction
in april 2016, the kenyan government announced its intention to close dadaab, the largest 
refugee camp complex in the world. dadaab currently hosts around 400,000 refugees, the 
majority of them somalis. according to interior cabinet secretary joseph nkaissery, the 
decision we have made to close the camps is explicit and final. . . . the refugees must be 
repatriated (psirmoi 2016).  
the  plan  to  close  dadaab  and  repatriate  the  somali  refugees  has  triggered  widespread 
condemnation, with refugees and their advocates insisting that any returns must be both 
safe and voluntary. a tripartite agreement between kenya, somalia, and unhcr was 
signed  in  november  2013  to  facilitate  such  movements,  but  by  may  2016  only  5,200 
refugees had repatriated under its auspices (mutamo 2016). 
it is clear that a large number of dadaabs refugees do not want to return to somalia, and 
will only do so  under pressure. the current kenyan crisis thus perfectly illustrates the 
difficult policy issues that surround refugee repatriation. under what conditions is it legal 
and ethical to promote refugee returns? does voluntariness matter and, if so, why? should 
safety take precedence over voluntariness?

 2016 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 4 number 3 (2016): 141-147this article examines these questions, setting out a brief history of refugee repatriation 
and  underlining  the  reasons  why  the  concept  of  voluntary  repatriation  in  safety  and 
with dignity should continue to be regarded as the foundation of all refugee returns. the 
article concludes with a set of recommendations involving not only how to strengthen this 
foundation, but also regarding possible alternatives to repatriation.

ii. legal and normative provisions
the cornerstone of refugee protection is the norm of non-refoulement. codified in article 
33 of the 1951 un refugee convention, it requires that no contracting state shall expel 
or return a refugee in any manner whatsoever to the frontiers of territories where his life or 
freedom would be threatened.1 
that principle was further reinforced by article 5 of the 1969 organization of african 
unity  (oau)  refugee  convention,  which  stipulates  that  the  essentially  voluntary 
character of repatriation shall be respected in all cases and no refugee shall be repatriated 
against his will. the oau convention also introduces the notion of safety to the legal 
and normative framework of refugee repatriation, stating that the country of asylum, in 
collaboration with the country of origin, shall make adequate arrangements for the safe 
return of refugees who request repatriation.2
these principles were further elaborated in later years. unhcrs executive committee, 
for instance, issued a conclusion in 1985 that confirmed the need for voluntary repatriation 
to be carried out under conditions of absolute safety (unhcr 1980). a 1992 unhcr 
discussion note on protection aspects of voluntary repatriation added another concept 
to the discourse by insisting that the return of refugees to their country of origin must be 
carried out under conditions of safety and dignity (unhcr 1992).
the contribution that the principle of voluntary repatriation makes to refugee protection is 
obvious. yet it is equally clear that the limitations such a principle places on repatriation is 
frequently resented by states. host countries are often impatient to see uninvited refugees 
leave. countries of origin are sometimes impatient to see them return and signal the end 
of  conflict.  donor  states  are  eager  to  bring  an  end  to  the  long-term  refugee  assistance 
programs that they fund.
unhcr  frequently  plays  an  ambiguous  role  in  such  negotiations,  seeking  to  uphold 
internationally  recognized  legal  and  ethical  principles  of  which  it  is  the  custodian, 
while simultaneously meeting the concerns of these stakeholders. in the worst cases, the 
united nations refugee agency has capitulated to such pressures and actively engaged in 
repatriation operations that are far from safe or voluntary. 
this is in part because the question of what voluntariness, safety, and dignity actually mean 
is open to different interpretations. in 1996, for example, unhcr issued its voluntary 
repatriation  handbook,  which  defined  voluntariness  as  the  absence  of  any  physical, 
1   convention relating to the status of refugees (geneva, 28 july 1951) 189 u.n.t.s. 137, entered into force 
22 april 1954, 137, http://www.refworld.org/docid/3be01b964.html.
2   organization of african unity (oau), convention governing the specific aspects of refugee problems in 
africa (10 september 1969) 1001 u.n.t.s. 45, http://www.refworld.org/docid/3ae6b36018.html.

142

journal on migration and human securitypsychological or material pressure . . . which push the refugee to repatriate (unhcr 
1996a). 
with respect to safety and dignity, the handbook stated that such conditions are fulfilled 
when repatriating refugees are not manhandled, when they can return unconditionally, 
at their own pace, are not arbitrarily separated from family members and are treated 
with respect and full acceptance by their national authorities (unhcr 1996b).
despite these very clear provisions, there was considerable debate within unhcr at this 
time about the extent to which voluntariness should really be considered a necessary rather 
than a desirable condition for repatriation to take place. 
one paper, originally intended to form a chapter of the repatriation handbook, argued that 
voluntary return was not a non-derogable principle. influential though it may be, it is not 
codified in any manner which requires its absolute respect by states. . . .the initiative for 
pursuing repatriation does not necessarily or exclusively belong to the refugee.3
such reasoning was condemned by some staff members, who insisted that voluntariness 
was an essential prerequisite for safe and viable return and whose very purpose was to 
stand in the way of impatient political action for mass returns lacking basic safeguards.4 
as the next section of this article explains, unhcr was soon to capitulate to such demands 
for impatient action, with serious consequences for the organizations reputation. 

iii. the practice of voluntary repatriation
the  notion  of  voluntary  repatriation  emerged  at  a  particular  place  and  time.  in  the 
immediate aftermath of world war ii, the allies had forcibly returned to stalinist russia 
soviet citizens who had fought alongside the germans; many such citizens were shot or 
sentenced to forced labor and internal exile. 
when the 1951 refugee convention was drafted and unhcr established in 1950, the 
principles  of  non-refoulement  and  voluntary  repatriation  were  deliberately  intended  to 
prevent a repetition of these events and to block the repatriation of refugees to communist 
states. large-scale repatriation movements did not occur until the 1960s and 1970s, when 
successful national liberation struggles in africa allowed more than a million refugees to 
return to their homes. 
in  such  cases,  refugee  returns  were  prompted  by  some  very  evident  and  fundamental 
changes in countries of origin. unhcrs engagement in these repatriations was primarily 
a logistical one. the safety and voluntariness of such returns were not in question. 
that  situation  began  to  change  in  the  1980s,  a  period  when  refugee  numbers  in  the 
developing  world  grew  rapidly.  many  refugee-hosting  states,  struggling  to  cope  with 
the  effects  of  economic  mismanagement  and  imposed  structural  adjustment  programs, 
expressed mounting concern about the impact of the increasingly large-scale and long-term 
refugee populations living on their territory. 

3   anonymous paper cited in long (2014, 134).
4   statement of dennis mcnamara, cited in long (2014, 136).

143

safe and voluntary refugee repatriationdonor states were equally frustrated by the apparent need to continue to fund assistance 
programs that persisted for years on end, but which did nothing to bring about lasting 
solutions. states were increasingly eager to promote repatriation, rather than just to facilitate 
it, with unhcr playing a central role in that process. 
executive committee conclusion 29 of 1983, for example, called on states to facilitate 
the  work  of  unhcr  in  creating  conditions  favourable  to  and  promoting  voluntary 
repatriation, which whenever appropriate and feasible is the most desirable solution for 
refugee problems (unhcr 1983). 
in accordance with this principle, refugees came under mounting pressure to repatriate. 
in the 1970s and 1980s, a number of refugee populations  the rohingya in bangladesh, 
ethiopians in djibouti, and cambodians in thailand, for example  were all subjected 
to coerced repatriations which were at least tacitly condoned by unhcr and the wider 
international community.
in the early 1990s, the end of cold war proxy conflicts in africa and asia reinforced the 
belief that repatriation was the best  and often the only  way to bring refugee situations 
to an end. un high commissioner for refugees sadako ogata declared that the 1990s 
would become known as the decade of repatriation, and more than 10 million refugees 
returned to countries such as afghanistan, cambodia, mozambique, and nicaragua during 
this period. 
while these repatriations were largely voluntary in nature, unhcr now assumed a much 
more proactive role in repatriation processes. this included:

  promoting repatriation to countries which the organization deemed to be ready for 

refugee returns;
creating tripartite commissions with countries of origin and asylum in order to 
initiate and accelerate repatriation movements;

 

 

 

  withdrawing  food  assistance,  educational,  and  other  services  from  refugee 

populations that were expected to repatriate;
establishing repatriation targets and measuring operational success in terms of the 
speed and scale of return;
invoking  the  cessation  clauses  of  the  1951  refugee  convention  so  as  to  make 
repatriation obligatory;
cooperating with host states that engaged in forced repatriation movements; and

 
  developing the notions of safe and imposed return, which did not require the 

consent of refugees.5

in some cases, the notion of imposed return was put into practice. in december 1996, 
for example, the tanzanian government and unhcr issued a joint statement, affirming 
that all rwandese refugees can now return to their country. up to half a million refugees 
were rounded up by the tanzanian army, corralled into containment camps and forced to 
return to an authoritarian state where disappearances, arbitrary detentions, and extrajudicial 
killings were rife (see, e.g., amnesty 1997). 

5   this list is derived from an analysis of unhcr repatriation operations between 1984 and 2002, focusing 
primarily on refugee returns from the democratic republic of congo, djibouti, malawi, myanmar, pakistan, 
tanzania, and thailand.

144

journal on migration and human securityconfronted  with  stinging  criticism  from  organizations  such  as  amnesty  international 
and human rights watch, unhcr quietly abandoned the notion that repatriation could 
legitimately  take  place  on  a  non-consensual  basis.  it  is  now  widely  acknowledged   
even within the organization  that the operation amounted to a refoulement, and thus 
fundamentally breached unhcrs duty of refugee protection. 

iv. repatriation today
if the 1990s were a decade of repatriation, the last 10 years are best described as a decade of 
protracted emergencies. millions of new refugees have been created as a result of intense 
violence in burundi, central african republic, iraq, nigeria, south sudan, syria, ukraine, 
and yemen. at the same time, longstanding conflicts in countries such as afghanistan, the 
democratic republic of congo, myanmar, somalia, and sudan have gone unresolved. 
as a result of these developments, refugee numbers have jumped to an all-time high, while 
repatriation levels have dropped to an historic low. thus, in 2014, the last year for which 
unhcr figures are available, only 126,800 refugees returned to their country of origin, 
the lowest number recorded for 30 years (unhcr 2015, 8). while there is now a degree of 
optimism about the potential for safe and voluntary return from thailand to myanmar, the 
same cannot be said of the other situations listed above. 
and  yet  the  pressure  on  refugees  to  return  has  not  disappeared. while the  outcome of 
kenyas camp closure announcement is yet to be seen, there is a clear danger that some 
somali refugees will repatriate, believing that they have no other option. 
in  broader  context, australia  and  the  european  union  have  both  put  the  principles  of 
asylum and non-refoulement at risk by establishing agreements that enable refugees to be 
deported to other states. the recently convened world humanitarian summit was signally 
silent on the issue of safe and voluntary refugee repatriation. 
the  notion  of  imposed  return  also  continues  to  have  its  advocates,  who  argue  that 
postconflict development agendas should be prioritized once repatriation is safe enough. 
oxford economist paul collier, for example, has argued that only host governments of 
asylum-seeking migrants have this power [to engineer a coordinated return] . . . they should 
use it (collier 2013, 263). this is exactly what kenya is eager to do.

v. recommendations and conclusion
this article demonstrates that repatriation should not be engineered by states or by unhcr. 
every effort should be made to preserve the principles of safety, voluntariness, and dignity 
in the context of refugee returns. this is in part because refugee return is successful in the 
long term only if it is also sustainable. refugees who are internally displaced upon their 
return, who are obliged to eke out a living in shanty towns or squatter settlements, or who 
feel obliged to move on to another country or continent in order to meet their basic needs, 
cannot be considered to have found a lasting solution to their plight. 

145

safe and voluntary refugee repatriationthe article consequently makes the following recommendations:
1. voluntariness

 

if situations arise in which refugees are forced or feel pressured to return to their 
country  of  origin,  the  international  community  should  make  no  pretense  with 
respect to their non-consensual nature. the notion of voluntariness should not be 
stretched so thin as to lose all meaning. 

  unhcr should scrupulously avoid an operational engagement in such operations 
where voluntariness is questionable, even in situations where it might be under 
pressure to engage by influential host and donor states. 

2. alternative solutions

  the  international  refugee  regime  should  abandon  the  hierarchy  of  solutions 
established in the 1980s and 1990s (with repatriation at the top) and give greater 
attention to the potential for local integration (of both a de jure and de facto nature) 
and resettlement to third countries.

  more attention should be paid to innovative approaches to solutions such as labor 
mobility,  freedom  of  movement,  and  cross-border  mobility  arrangements  for 
refugees. 

3. cessation and promotion of return

 

  there is a need to review the way in which the cessation clauses are applied to 

refugee populations, especially when linked to the promotion of refugee returns. 

  unhcr and its partners should review the practice of promoting repatriation to 
countries of origin which have not met the threshold for the cessation clauses to be 
invoked.
in situations where refugees have established close social, economic, and personal 
links with their host states and communities, application of the cessation clauses 
should not lead automatically to an assumption that repatriation will take place. 
instead,  former  refugees  in  these  situations  should  be  granted  some  kind  of 
alternative residency status (e.g., as a resident alien) even if full naturalization is 
not available to them. 

  special consideration should be given to second and third generation refugees when 
planning for cessation of status or promotion of return, as they will never have seen 
their home country.

  the  international  community  should  consider  the  extent  and  ways  in  which 
humanitarian organizations and other members of the international refugee regime 
can contribute to broader foundations of peace building and development, crucial 
prerequisites for any durable repatriation.

4. negotiating repatriation

 

in situations where safe and voluntary returns are feasible, the repatriation process 
should be made a more participatory one. 

  where  possible,  the  international  community  should  encourage  the  use  of 
quadripartite commissions, in which refugees would take their place alongside 

146

journal on migration and human securityunhcr and countries of origin and asylum to help to negotiate the conditions for 
return.

  refugees should also be more extensively involved in monitoring the safety and 

 

ensuring the voluntariness of return. 
go  and  see  visits    which  have  become  a  valuable  feature  of  repatriation 
operations, enabling refugees to spend some time in their homeland before making 
a final decision to return  should be complemented by come and tell visits, in 
which refugees who have already repatriated are able to relate their experiences to 
those who remain in countries of asylum.

