global trends in immigration 
detention and alternatives to 
detention: practical, political and 
symbolic rationales 

robyn sampson1
la trobe university

grant mitchell
international detention coalition

executive summary
immigration detention is a growing threat to the well-being of migrants 
worldwide. while the use of this tool continues to increase, there is a growing 
consensus by governments on the need to pursue alternative programs. this 
paper examines the nature of these apparently contradictory developments 
and the reasons for tension in this area of migration policy. drawing from 
research conducted by the international detention coalition and la trobe 
university, this paper describes the community assessment and placement 
(cap) model, which seeks to prevent unnecessary detention, while allowing 
governments  to  meet  the  rationale  offered  for  detention.  it  argues  that 
the  global  trends  of  growth  in  detention  and  an  increased  emphasis  on 
alternatives reflect competing political, policy and operational objectives. 
for  example,  governments  wish  to  ensure  compliance  with  deportation 
orders; alleviate political pressures regarding the harms associated with 
detention; and demonstrate control of territorial borders. understanding 
the multiple rationales that shape this area of migration policy can help 
make  sense  of  contradictory  policy  developments  and  identify  the  most 
effective ways to safeguard those who might be subject to detention.  

1  robyn sampson was supported by a la trobe university post-graduate award. the authors gratefully 
acknowledge  the  financial  support  of  the  myer  foundation,  the  oak  foundation  and  the  open  society 
institute for this research. we would like to thank katherine wright and lucy bowring for their insightful 
comments and suggestions on an earlier version of this paper.

 2013 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 1 number 3 (2013): 97-121introduction

in detention our son was bored, he didnt play with the other kids, he cried, he just said, 
i want to get out. but here he is doing much better. it has made a big difference being in 
the community. 
stateless  asylum  seeker  in  an  alternative  to  detention  program,  melbourne,  australia 
(australian human rights commission 2012, 16)

immigration  detention  has  emerged  as  a  significant  policy  through  which  governments 
seek to control irregular migrant populations and eject unwanted migrants.  detention has 
increasingly become a preferred means for states to maintain and assert their territorial 
authority  and  legitimacy,  and  respond  to  mounting  political  pressures  regarding  border 
security. 
notwithstanding the growth in policies of containment and control, government interest 
in alternatives to detention has recently increased as well. alternatives to detention are 
seen  as  a  way  to  achieve  effective  migration  management,  while  protecting  the  rights 
and  dignity  of  migrants.  more  governments  are  taking  steps  to  explore  and  implement 
alternatives,  ranging  from  scoping  studies  and  small-scale  pilot  projects  to  significant 
policy developments and systemic change. 
this  paper  reconciles  these  apparently  competing  trends  by  identifying  the  practical, 
political  and  symbolic  rationales  underlying  this  area  of  migration  policy.    it  presents 
research on alternatives to detention drawn from the study conducted by the international 
detention coalition2 (idc) and la trobe university, there are alternatives: a handbook 
for  preventing  unnecessary  immigration  detention  (sampson,  mitchell  and  bowring 
2011), and it supplements these findings with recent data and cases. 

immigration detention
immigration detention has increased globally as migration, both regular and irregular, has 
increased.   according to recent united nations (un) estimates, the number of international 
migrants worldwide grew from 154 million in 1990 to 232 million in 2013 (undesa 
2013). as the number of migrants crossing state borders has grown, governments have 
responded  to  the  social  and  economic  benefits  of  migration  by  developing  avenues  to 
enable  legal  migration  for  employment,  education,  family  reunification  and  tourism. 
however, significant migration occurs outside of legal channels. the international labour 
organization  (ilo)  estimated  that  in  2004  between  10  and  15  precent  of  the  worlds 
immigrants were unauthorized (ilo 2004).  

2  the international detention coalition (idc) is a global network of over 300 non-governmental organizations, 
faith-based groups, academics and practitioners in more than 50 countries that advocate for and provide 
direct services to refugees, asylum-seekers and migrants in immigration detention. further information is 
available at www.idcoalition.org. 

98

journal on migration and human securitydespite the success of many systems of governance in managing large flows of people, 
a perception of unregulated, out-of-control migration has magnified concerns regarding 
security and crime, job availability and the maintenance of cultural heritage (undp 2009). 
the issue has been further politicized in situations where it has been framed as an issue of 
state security and associated with the spread of international terrorism since september 11, 
2001 (adamson 2006; coutu and giroux 2006; kerwin 2005). in these situations, irregular 
migration can become a particular focus of public concern. 
the increase in migration flows and the perceived link of migration with issues of national 
security have coincided with the rise of globalization in the late 20th century. some have 
argued that globalization would lead to the end of the nation-state (albert 1998; omae 
1995). in fact, the emergence of transnational corporations (edwards 2005), supranational 
political bodies (guild 2006), regional free trade agreements (turbeville iii and bradbury 
2005) and cyberspace (brunn 1998) have increased the power of global and virtual bodies 
at the expense of the state. issues of territory, sovereignty and political authority are being 
recalibrated in light of these changes, resulting in new articulations of territorial control 
(dauvergne 2008; mcnevin 2011). 
immigration  detention  is  a  contested  term,  but  is  generally  viewed  as  a  form  of 
administrative  confinement,  as  opposed  to  criminal  incarceration.3  a  number  of  inter-
governmental documents have defined the term (unhcr 1999, 2012).4  silverman and 
massa define it as: 

[t]he holding of foreign nationals, or non-citizens, for the purposes of realizing an 
immigration-related goal. this definition is characterised by three central elements: 
first, detention represents a deprivation of liberty; second, it takes place in a designated 
facility; and third, it is being carried out in service of an immigration-related goal. 
(2012, 679)

this definition is both broad and practical, although it loses some of the legal specificity 
found elsewhere. as with other definitions, it draws our attention to the place in which 
an individual is confined. by contrast, alternatives to detention are not tied to a particular 
location but rather refer to a set of tools that can be applied no matter where the individual 
is located (sampson 2013).
migrant populations who are subject to detention vary considerably across contexts, and 
are thus difficult to categorize.  the most consistent use of detention is of those who are 
about to be deported including those refused entry and those who have lost a valid status 
due  to  committing  an  unrelated  criminal  offence.   additionally,  unauthorized  migrants 
including asylum seekers can be detained on arrival for screening processes such as identity, 

3  it is worth noting that irregular migration is considered a criminal offense in some countries and, as such, 
the migrant is convicted and imprisoned for this crime. this imprisonment is arguably a form of detention, 
but is not discussed in this paper. in addition, there is some debate over whether refugee camps that deny 
freedom of movement should be considered a form of detention but, again, these have not been included in 
this paper.
4  council directive 2003/9/ec, laying down minimum standards for the reception of asylum seekers, 
2003 o.j. (l31) 18.  

99

global trends in immigration detention and alternativeshealth and security checks. others are detained during an expedited determination process5 
or throughout a full refugee status determination process. this population also includes 
growing numbers of asylum seekers subject to the dublin agreement6 who are awaiting 
return to the country of entry into the european union (eu) for processing. additionally, 
detention is sometimes used for migrants located in a state, but without a valid permit 
or visa. these may include unauthorized migrants, stateless persons, victims of human 
trafficking and unhcr-recognized refugees.  
immigration detention facilities vary widely in size and condition, both internationally and 
within individual states. facilities range from centers built exclusively to detain migrants 
that are very similar to prisons, to makeshift camp sites (flynn 2011). detention can also 
occur in airport transit zones, closed screening facilities, prisons and police stations. in 
addition, individual houses, hotels, motels, barges, and cargo containers have been used in 
some instances. many facilities are located in regional or remote areas that are difficult to 
reach from the nearest city, including on islands, in forests and in deserts. conditions range 
from newly-built and clean facilities to dilapidated and dirty structures, including some 
never intended for human habitation. 
the length of time individuals are subject to detention also varies significantly depending 
on the individual case and the country in which the detention occurs. detention can range 
from  a  few  hours  to  days,  weeks,  months  and  years.  in  some  contexts,  it  is  indefinite. 
the  length  of  time  a  person  is  detained  is  subject  to  legally  prescribed  limits  in  some 
countries.  for example, the  maximum length of detention for the purposes of removal 
in eu member states ranges from 32 days in france to two years in romania, with no set 
time limits in nine eu countries (eu fra 2010). the duration of detention may depend 
on the reasons for detention; the length of an administrative process, such as a refugee 
determination  process;  or  practical  issues  in  achieving  release  or  deportation  including 
difficulties negotiating with a country of return. stateless people are often subject to the 
longest periods of detention (the equal rights trust 2010). 

global trends in immigration detention
the idc observed several trends when it undertook global consultations7 in 2011-12. a 
central concern was increased use of immigration detention in all regions, including the 
increased  use  of  prisons  and  the  building  of  new  detention  facilities. we  focus  in  this 
section on the trend of global detention growth.8 
5  some countries have established an accelerated process which applies when officers believe they will be 
able to make a decision to refuse or grant refugee status in a short timeframe. in the uk, this is called the 
detained fast track. 
6  the dublin regulation (also known as dublin ii) provides a legal framework by which eu member 
states determine which state is responsible for processing an asylum claim and provides for the transfer of 
the applicant to that country for processing. 
7  the idc undertook regional and national consultations with its members and stakeholders between 2011 
and 2012. the consultations covered more than 250 individuals from 67 countries and included regional 
workshops in africa, asia, americas, europe and the middle east and north africa (idc 2012). 
8  in addition, the idc consultations highlighted the growing use of private companies to manage facilities 
(golash-boza 2009); the criminalisation of irregular migrants (bosworth and guild 2008; healey 2004); 

100

journal on migration and human securitythe best evidence of the growing global population of detainees can be found in estimates 
of  the  total  detention  capacity  for  individual  countries.9    the  overall  global  detention 
capacity and number detained at any one time is unknown.10  detention capacity is the 
number of people who can be detained at any given time within a countrys dedicated 
detention facilities. detention capacity in the united states  believed to detain the largest 
number of immigrants worldwide  has increased substantially in recent years from 6,785 
in  1994  (global  detention  project  2009e)  to  34,000  by  2013  (berger  2013).11  on  the 
other side of the atlantic, the united kingdom has expanded the capacity of its facilities 
from 250 in 1993 to 3,500 in 2011 (global detention project 2011b). the netherlands 
detention capacity expanded from 45 in 1980 to 3,310 in 2006 (broeders 2010). between 
2010 and 2011, australia expanded from operating 10 to 21 detention centers. as of late 
2012, australia  maintained  the  capacity  to  detain  6,929  persons  on  its  territory  with  a 
contingency capacity of 8,957 (department of immigration and citizenship 2012).12 
other  countries  that  maintain  significant  detention  regimes  include  malaysia  with  a 
capacity of 11,400 (global detention project 2009c), spain with a capacity of 7,000 (global 
detention project 2010a), and south africa, whose major detention facility holds 6,500, 
with hundreds more detained in ad hoc facilities (global detention project 2009d; lawyers 
for  human  rights  2008).  israel  detains  many  hundreds  of  migrants  in  prisons  (global 
detention project 2011a) and detention centers (hotline for migrant workers 2012) and is 
reportedly building an 8,000-bed facility (stewart 2012). greece has a detention capacity 
of 2,500, which it augments through detention at other sites such as police stations (global 
detention project 2009a; pro asyl 2007). meanwhile, italy has a capacity of 1,900 (global 
detention project 2012a) and germanys facilities hold approximately 2,250 (broeders 
2010). 
additionally, increased global detention numbers are caused by increased investment by 
destination countries in the detention infrastructure of transit countries (aubarell, zapata-
barrero and aragall 2009; lutterbeck 2006; taylor 2010b). this externalisation of border 
control  is  best  documented  in  the  eu,  which  has  been  investing  in  the  capacity  of  its 
neighbours to detect, detain and deter migrants who are likely planning irregular onward 
travel to europe (aubarell, zapata-barrero and aragall 2009; lavenex and uarer 2004; 
zapata-barrero, zaragoza and aragall 2009). for example, ukraine received 30 million 
euros from the european union in 2011 to build nine new detention centers, despite a drop 
in irregular migration numbers in that country (global detention project 2012b; human 
rights watch 2010).  libya detains between 4,000 and 6,000 persons at any given time 
and  the  extra-territorialisation  of  detention  (described  in  more  detail  below).  worldwide,  the  practice 
of  detaining  refugees,  asylum  seekers  and  irregular  migrants  was  noted.    many  raised  issues  regarding 
the detention of children, the elderly, disabled and other vulnerable groups. prolonged detention in poor 
conditions, often with little or no access to asylum procedures or judicial oversight, was a common area of 
concern. 
9  we note that many countries do not regularly publish these data and so figures provided for each country 
are as recent as possible at the time of writing.
10  the global detention project aims to document immigration detention infrastructure internationally but 
as yet has not produced a global estimate. for individual country estimates see www.globaldetentionproject.
org.
11  a total of over 429,000 persons were detained in the year 2012 (koulish and noferi 2013).
12  the detained population on australian territory in may 2013 was 11,341 people including 3,057 children 
(department of immigration and citizenship 2013).

101

global trends in immigration detention and alternatives(amnesty  international  2013;  see  also  global  detention  project  2009b)  while  turkey 
is expanding its detention capacity from 900 to 2,500 with the construction of two new 
facilities  (global  detention  project  2010b;  helsinki  citizens  assembly  2007;  human 
rights watch 2008; kirici 2004). 
a similar dynamic is seen in the political and financial investment of the united states in 
the detention capacity of guatemala (flynn 2006) and mexico (global detention project 
2013),  although  the  evidence  for  direct  us  funding  of  detention  in  mexico  is  mixed 
(kimball 2007, 107). mexico maintains a detention capacity of 3,500 and detained almost 
90,000 migrants during 2012 (global detention project 2013). meanwhile, in the asia-
pacific, australia has similarly wielded its influence and resources to increase the detention 
capacity of indonesia, nauru and papua new guinea (nethery, rafferty-brown and taylor 
2012; taylor 2010a; 2010b).13 

global trends in alternatives to detention
a number of countries are undertaking detention reform including legislative and policy 
changes  to  limit  the  use  of  detention,  avoid  detention  of  certain  vulnerable  groups, 
and  introduce  community-based14  supervision  options.    these  include  greater  release 
mechanisms  in  north  america,  australia  and  new  zealand,  new  reporting  and  case 
management  models  in  europe,  provisional  release  mechanisms  in  east asia,  judicial 
release in south asia, and shelter models in the middle east and central america. this 
section describes examples of developments that augment the findings of the idcs 2011 
study in order to illustrate recent trends. 

alternatives to detention in law  the european union 

there has been an increase in legislation providing for alternatives to detention in the eu. 
by the end of 2011, all member states had introduced alternatives to detention into national 
legislation except malta (eu fra 2012, 52). this development is generally considered to 
be linked to two key contextual factors:  transposing the eu return directive15 into national 
law  and  an  increased  interest  in  reducing  detention  (eu  fra  2011,  48).  such  interest 

13  as of may 2013, nauru was detaining 430 migrants delivered by australian authorities, while papua new 
guinea held 302 such persons in detention camps on manus island, with ongoing expansion (senate legal 
and constitutional affairs legislation committee 2013, 27). 
14  we use the terms community and community-based to refer to the general society of the local area 
or host country and to indicate that a particular alternative to detention program involves the placement 
of  an  individual  amongst  that  broader  society. this  is  in  contrast  to  the  placement of  an  individual in  a 
detention  center  or  other  place  of  confinement. the  term  community  is  sometimes  taken  to  mean  the 
cultural community of co-nationals for the migrants in question, but this is not our intended interpretation 
of the term. however, there are times when the cultural community may play an important role in offering 
alternative to detention options.
15  the eu return directive was agreed by member states in 2008 and entered into force at the end of 2010. 
it sets forth common standards on the return and removal of irregular migrants which include limiting the use 
of detention. see council directive 2008/115/ec, on common standards and procedures in member states 
for returning illegally staying third-country nationals, 2008 o.j. (l348) 98. 

102

journal on migration and human securitywas evident during discussions at the western european roundtable held by unhcr and 
supported by the idc in november 2011 (unhcr 2011). 

national screening and assessment tool  the united states

as part of a larger detention reform process emerging after a change in government (dhs 
2009; schriro 2009), the united states developed a risk assessment tool, called the risk 
classification  assessment  (rca),  designed  to  inform  immigration  officers  decisions 
regarding detention during the intake process (ice 2013; unhcr 2013, 6). the tool is 
designed to screen for needs (i.e. vulnerabilities) and risks (i.e. flight risk and danger), and 
enable officers to identify appropriate release options and types of conditions required, 
if any.  the us government announced in march 2013 that the risk tool was deployed 
nationally.   it is hoped the tool will improve consistency in decisions nationally and divert 
vulnerable and low-risk individuals from detention.  that said, human rights advocates 
who reviewed an early version of the tool criticized it for being weighted towards over-
detention.  moreover, although supervisory officers retain ability to overturn a determination 
after a qualitative assessment, it is unclear whether this occurs in practice, as supervisors 
must presumptively follow the automated recommendation unless they state reasons on the 
record otherwise (unhcr 2013, 6). 

policy  changes  including  a  reduction  in  detention  numbers  - 
japan 

japan  has  made  considerable  progress  on  alternatives  to  detention  after  experiencing 
serious  challenges  within  detention  facilities  (including  riots  and  self-harming)  and 
increased pressure from advocacy groups. following a regional roundtable in april 2010 
(at which the preliminary results of this research were presented), japan decided to release 
all children from detention and introduce a policy to prevent the detention of children in the 
future (idc 2011a). it has since reduced its overall detention numbers, developed working 
partnerships with local non-governmental organizations and supported an alternative to 
detention pilot project for vulnerable groups.

piloting alternatives to detention  the netherlands

the netherlands is piloting four alternatives to detention that are due to be evaluated in 
2013 (eu fra 2012). one of these pilots works with migrants who are obliged to leave 
the country. the pilot is testing the effectiveness of a program that meets their basic needs, 
but also requires residency with a reliable individual and regular reporting to authorities 
(eu fra 2012, 53).   

alternatives to detention for children and vulnerable groups

the un committee on the rights of the child has called on states to expeditiously and 
completely cease the detention of children on the basis of their immigration status (2012, 
18). belgium has promoted alternatives in this area following a significant reform in 2009 

103

global trends in immigration detention and alternativeswhich ended its detention of children in the face of sustained criticism (jesuit refugee 
service europe 2011). several countries in europe, such as finland, poland and the uk, 
have now made similar commitments. the french president made a campaign pledge to 
end the detention of children and to expand alternatives (vie publique 2012). subsequently, 
a circular from the ministry of the interior limited the detention of minors to exceptional 
circumstances (henry 2012). 
in thailand and malaysia, the ad hoc release of vulnerable groups, such as refugees registered 
with unhcr, has been increasing as those governments seek to reduce pressures on their 
detention  networks,  deal  with  intractable  cases,  and  respond  to  civil  society  advocacy. 
meanwhile, in tanzania, where detention is often in prisons, the government is working 
with local and international groups to develop alternatives for vulnerable groups including 
children.

international  human  rights  focus  on  alternatives  to 
detention
additionally,  alternatives  to  detention  have  become  a  priority  for  international  human 
rights bodies. this section highlights the work of four united nations bodies in order to 
illustrate the international political context that is shaping global trends. 

united nations general assembly (the assembly)

the  assembly  has  recognized  the  serious  problem  of  immigration  detention  in  two 
resolutions. in resolution 63/184, the assembly called upon states to respect the human 
rights  and  the  inherent  dignity  of  migrants  and  to  put  an  end  to  arbitrary  arrest  and 
detention (un general assembly 2009, para. 9). it called for alternatives to detention 
to be implemented and for periods of detention to be reviewed. the assembly also noted 
with approval state measures that reduce the detention of irregular migrants (un general 
assembly 2009, para. 13). in 2010, the assembly again adopted a resolution on the protection 
of migrants and repeated its calls for states to reduce the detention of unauthorized migrants 
(un general assembly 2010, para. 4). in october 2013, the assembly held the second 
high level dialogue on international migration and development, at which the secretary 
general stated, we need to create more channels for safe and orderly migration, and to 
seek alternatives to the administrative detention of migrants (idc 2013).

united nations human rights council (the council)

in september 2009, the council held a special panel discussion devoted to the human rights 
of migrants in detention due to human rights concerns related to the recourse to detention 
of migrants and the duration and conditions of their detention (council 2009, 17). the 
council  further  recognized  the  problem  of  immigration  detention  in  two  resolutions  in 
2010: one on arbitrary detention and the other on the human rights of migrants. resolution 
15/16 calls upon states to put an end to arbitrary arrest and detention and  to adopt, 
where applicable, alternative measures to detention (council 2010, para. 8). 

104

journal on migration and human securityunited nations office of the high commissioner for human rights 
(ohchr)

in september 2009, the un high commissioner for human rights remarked that the plight 
of migrants, and particularly migrants in an irregular situation, is one of todays most 
critical human rights challenges (2009, 2). the strategic management plan for 2010-2011 
subsequently notes the office will continue to  address concerns related to migration 
detention (ohchr 2009, 54). in 2010, ohchr released a study on the rights of the 
child in the context of migration which concludes that children should only be detained 
as a last resort (ohchr 2010, paras. 51-53). the study encourages the use of alternatives 
and refers to the idc research (ohchr 2010, para. 54; see corlett, mitchell, van hove, 
bowring  and wright  2012).  more  recently,  the  high  commissioner  called  on  states  to 
explore effective alternatives to immigration detention, particularly for children and other 
vulnerable groups of migrants (un high commissioner for human rights 2012). 

united nations high commissioner for refugees (unhcr)

although the unhcr has been concerned about the detention of refugees and asylum 
seekers since at least 1997 (unhcr 2009, 136), the issue has been prioritized in recent 
years. at the 2009 executive committee (excom) meetings, unhcr and the idc held 
a side meeting on alternatives to detention attended by 30 governments. the following 
year,  excom  stated  that  to  address  unjustified  detention,  unhcr  advocates  strongly 
for the use of effective alternatives to detention (excom 2010, para. 40). unhcr also 
commissioned three studies on detention (costello and kaytaz 2013; edwards 2011a; field 
and edwards 2006), held a global roundtable on alternatives to detention with ohchr 
(turk and edwards 2011), hosted several regional roundtables, and revised its guidelines 
on immigration detention (unhcr 2012).

the  practical,  political  and  symbolic  rationales  of 
detention policy
recent  receptivity  to  alternatives  to  detention  fits  somewhat  awkwardly  alongside  the 
long-standing  trend  of  investment  in  detention.  based  on  our  observations  in  the  field 
and the literature on detention, we contend that detention policy is shaped by three major 
rationales, discussed below. 

practical 

the formal purpose (leerkes and broeder 2010) of immigration detention is to achieve 
particular practical outcomes, such as departure from the country. there are many alternative 
options that enable governments to fulfill these management objectives without resorting 
to detention (sampson, mitchell and bowring 2011; edwards 2011a, 2011b; costello and 
kaytaz 2013). as demonstrated in the following section, these range from open centers for 
asylum seekers on arrival while undertaking initial checks (sweden) to holistic monitoring 
and supervision programs for high risk deportees (canada). 

105

global trends in immigration detention and alternativesinterest in alternatives to detention rises when they are demonstrated to meet the same 
practical policy objectives of detentioni.e. high rates of compliance and case resolution 
(see sampson, mitchell and bowring 2011). thus pilot programs in a number of countries 
(described earlier) are used to test the ability of alternatives to fulfill set practical objectives.
alternatives that fulfill practical policy objectives can often be put into effect without a 
formal modification of policy or law. however, barriers to implementation can include the 
amount of energy and money that may be required to introduce and establish new modes 
of operation and the level of investment in existing detention policy and infrastructure (a 
form of institutional path dependency, see tavan 2012). 

political 

as the use of detention has grown, so has the corresponding criticism of the policy and 
the advocacy for change in many countries. the policy of detention is highly controversial 
due to its impacts on health and human rights (coffey et al 2010; green and eagar 2010; 
lorek et al 2009; robjant, hassan and katona 2009) and this brings with it significant 
and specific political pressures from a range of critics (gryll 2011; silverman 2012; flynn 
2012). detention has even become a campaign issue in some countries, as noted earlier in 
relation to the french president. nationalistic groups press for heightened border controls 
and reduced (irregular) migration (grillo 2005; karner 2011; mavroudi 2010), creating a 
noisy political arena for this area of policy negotiation. 
adding to these domestic political pressures are those of international human rights bodies 
described earlier. international bodies in this area of policy represent an important political 
force and, in some countries, have coalesced with domestic political pressures to achieve 
change. for instance, the unhcrs engagement on the issue in japan, including facilitation 
of the regional roundtable discussion with peer countries, was an important development in 
the process of change in that country. similarly, the unhcrs involvement in lobbying for 
the release of registered refugees in countries such as thailand and malaysia has achieved 
some success.
political  pressure  is  heightened  when  it  comes  to  the  detention  of  vulnerable  groups, 
particularly  children.  advocacy,  including  from  international  bodies,  often  focuses  on 
children and other vulnerable groups.16 governments are often responsive to these concerns. 
while there are important reasons for prioritizing these groups for release (or non-detention), 
alternatives  for  vulnerable  groups  arguably  enable  governments  to  assuage  political 
pressures without dismantling the fundamental system of detention. this resonates with 
broader critiques of the role of compassion in migration policies (fassin 2005, 2011). the 
result is that alternatives may be achieved for a small group while the majority of detainees 
 usually single men  are left behind bars. despite these concerns, the development of 
alternatives  for  vulnerable  groups  can  lead  to  broader  changes.  for  instance, australia 
developed an alternative to detention program for children and vulnerable groups in 2005 
and this has since grown into a national system of release and community management for 
all asylum seekers (idc 2009).

16  for example, the international detention coalition was intimately involved in establishing the advocacy 
campaign end immigration detention of children. see http://endchilddetention.org/. 

106

journal on migration and human securitysymbolic 

despite the possibilities for practical and political pressures to achieve change, detention 
remains a potent symbol of sovereign authority over territory. broad social and political 
changes  have  all  worked  to  increase  the  significance  of  border  control  for  modern 
governments. increased migration flows, heightened security concerns and processes of 
globalization have coalesced to create a context in which border control and territorial 
integrity are central concerns for governments. it is within this context that detention has 
come to take on important symbolic functions by demonstrating control of borders for 
citizens and potential future arrivals alike (leerkes and broeders 2010; mainwaring 2012; 
pugliese 2008; welch and schuster 2005). these informal (leerkes and broeders 2010) 
or noisy (welch and schuster 2005) functions of detention are not codified in law but 
nevertheless  remain  crucial  to  its  ongoing  use  (mainwaring  2012; welch  and  schuster 
2005). immigration detention thus continues a tradition in which administrative detention is 
used to address social anxiety and maintain social order, as seen historically in reservations 
for indigenous populations and internment of enemy aliens (bashford and strange 2002; 
nethery 2009). 
we suggest there are two ways in which alternatives gain traction despite the symbolic 
logics of detention. first, some of the symbolic potency of detention can be diluted by 
shifting the language of border control to that of migration management (taylor 2005). 
throughout its work, the idc has reframed the narrative implicit in this area of policy 
by moving away from control to management. in this framework, governments regulate 
(irregular) migrant populations through processing, management and targeted enforcement 
rather  than  controlling  migrants  through  segregation  and  confinement.  governments 
can  thus  manage  migration  well  by  using  a  range  of  strategies  to  oversee  migrants  in 
the  community  while  fulfilling  expectations  regarding  compliance  and  case  resolution 
outcomes, without the human and financial costs of detention. such a shift in narrative 
(while ambitious) can provide legislators and bureaucrats with a new way of talking about 
alternatives  that  moderates  popular  anxiety  about  border  transgressions  and  promotes 
confidence in systems of governance. 
second, detention is not the only policy by which governments symbolically evoke control. 
alternatives to detention may well gain support in places where other policies or practices 
are successfully asserting authority and control in ways that are highly visible and/or hotly 
contested,  such  as  the  fortification  of  land  borders  or  the  interception  and  repatriation 
of migrants in boats. many deterrence and containment measures are used to secure the 
border (kaiser 2012; parsley 2003; wonders 2006) and alternatives to detention may gain 
ground when other policies or actions are serving this purpose. for instance, the expansion 
of  alternatives  in  australia  noted  above  has  occurred  alongside  increased  deterrence 
measures, including transfer of boat arrivals to the countries of nauru and papua new 
guinea. this  example  highlights  the  complex  political  environment  in  which  the  trend 
towards alternatives occurs in spite of competing logics of control.
in identifying the ways that detention and its alternatives are shaped by practical, political 
and symbolic rationales, we acknowledge that we have not incorporated every possible 
explanatory factor at work. rather, we have attempted to account for global trends based 

107

global trends in immigration detention and alternativeson our observations as they relate to debates about the role of detention in society. further 
work is needed to identify and analyze additional factors which contribute to this complex 
area of policy.17

the community assessment and placement model
to respond to the increasing interest in the use of alternatives to detention, the idc and 
la  trobe  university  undertook  an  in-depth  study  in  2009-2011  on  community-based 
alternatives to detention that utilizes survey and field data from over 20 countries (see 
sampson, mitchell and bowring 2011).18  the analysis of the data led to the development of 
the community assessment and placement model (the cap model). this section presents 
the model, offers examples from the case studies and discusses the model in relation to the 
rationales influencing the use of detention and its alternatives identified above.
for the purposes of the research, alternatives to immigration detention were defined as 
any legislation, policy or practice that allows asylum seekers, refugees and migrants to 
reside in the community with freedom of movement while their migration status is being 
resolved or while awaiting deportation or removal. this very open definition allowed the 
research to include all examples in which migrants retain freedom of movement while 
resolving a migration matter with authorities. this contrasts with other definitions of the 
term that focus on degrees of restrictions on freedom of movement (field and edwards 
2006; edwards 2011a). from this perspective, the research employed comparative policy 
analysis to explore the differing reasons that people are held in detention and to attempt to 
address those reasons by alternative means. the definition also incorporates policies that 
reduce reliance on detention or reduce the length of detention. 
the cap model identifies five steps governments can take to prevent unnecessary detention 
and improve the effectiveness of community-based programs (see figure 1). the bottom 
layer of the model describes the related placement options. the model is briefly explained 
here;  however,  we  note  a  more  detailed  description,  including  eighteen  detailed  case 
studies, is available elsewhere (sampson, mitchell and bowring 2011). 

17  we note that the paper is a joint endeavour between the director of a non-governmental organization 
engaged in international advocacy work (mitchell) and a scholar of forced migration (sampson). while our 
dual positions as scholar and advocate have inevitably shaped the arguments in the paper, we note that there 
is a long tradition of scholarly debate engaging with issues of social justice (farmer 2005; king 2011; streib 
1988) and we believe readers are well-placed to judge our analysis based on the evidence.
18  data collection consisted of in-depth literature review, an internet-based survey of 88 participants in 28 
countries, and fieldwork in nine countries within europe, the united states and hong kong. the fieldwork 
was undertaken between january and march 2010 and involved 43 interviews with 57 participants and eight 
site visits. further data on alternative to detention policies were derived from international meetings and 
idc members. a more detailed description of the methodology, including details of analysis, can be found in 
sampson, mitchell and bowring 2011. 

108

journal on migration and human securityfigure 1: the community assessment and placement model

step 1: presume detention is not necessary

the research identified a number of laws, policies and practices that presume detention 
is  not  necessary  when  resolving  an  individuals  migration  status.  the  presumption 
against detention can uphold each individuals right to freedom of movement and helps 
to prevent immigration officials from resorting to confinement when other options may 
suffice (edwards 2011a; eu fra 2010, 80-81). this presumption against detention can be 
reinforced when alternative measures are established in law or policy, thus directing officials 
to consider less intrusive options, as seen in section 315 of new zealands immigration 
act 2009. it is notable that some countries do not make use of immigration detention at all, 
such as venezuela, brazil, peru and uruguay.

109

global trends in immigration detention and alternativesstep 2: screen and assess the individual case

the  research  found  that  screening  and  assessment  of  individual  cases  are  important 
in  avoiding  unnecessary  detention,  as  authorities  identify  and  assess  levels  of  risk  and 
vulnerability  as  well  as  the  strengths  and  needs  of  each  person.  assessment  enables 
authorities to make an informed decision about the most appropriate way to manage and 
support the individual to resolve their migration status and to make case-by-case decisions 
about  the  need  for  detention.  the  four  key  areas  of  assessment  are:  legal  obligations; 
identity,  health  and  security  checks;  vulnerability;  and  individual  case  factors.  these 
areas of screening and assessment were observed in canada (citizenship and immigration 
canada 2007), hong kong (security bureau immigration department n.d.) and the united 
kingdom (uk border agency 2011). 

step 3: assess the community setting

in order to best match an individual with an appropriate and effective program of response, 
the research found it is also necessary to assess those factors in the community setting that 
can either support or undermine a persons ability to comply with immigration authorities 
and resolve their migration case. both governments and civil society groups can invest 
in  programs  that  support  migrants  in  the  community  in  order  to  boost  outcomes.  four 
key  elements  of  a  strong  community  setting  are:  case  management;  legal  advice  and 
interpretation;  the  ability  to  meet  basic  needs;  and  documentation.  for  example,  spain 
maintains an integrated reception system to support eligible asylum seekers in the first six 
months of a refugee determination process. this system includes accommodation, food 
and provision for other basic needs, identity documentation, case management by trained 
staff and access to legal advice (sampson, mitchell and bowring 2011, 34).

step 4: apply conditions in the community if necessary

include: 

if authorities remain concerned about the placement of an individual in the community, 
there are a range of additional mechanisms that can be introduced to promote ongoing 
engagement  with  authorities.  these  conditions 
individual  undertakings; 
monitoring;  supervision;  intensive  case  resolution;  and  negative  consequences  for  non-
compliance. these mechanisms can be used to construct a program of management that 
is appropriate for the individual case. it is important that the application of conditions is 
independently monitored to ensure that any conditions are applied in limited circumstances 
and only when necessary (edwards 2011a). the toronto bail program in canada provides 
intensive supervision of migrants who would otherwise be detained, such as those facing 
deportation  after  completing  a  prison  sentence.  this  comprehensive  case  management 
program achieves high rates of compliance and return from outcomes with a high-risk 
population (sampson, mitchell and bowring 2011, 44; edwards 2011a, 56-60; costello 
and kaytaz 2013). 

step 5: detain only as a last resort in exceptional cases

international human rights legislation and standards make clear that immigration detention 

110

journal on migration and human securityshould be used only as a last resort in exceptional cases after all other options have been 
shown to be inadequate in the individual case (idc 2011b). as a result, the cap model 
provides that detention is to be used only as a last resort in a small number of cases after 
all other options have been exhausted. if authorities can show before a court that detention 
is a necessary and proportionate mechanism in the case and that they have come to that 
decision after a thorough and non-discriminatory assessment of the individual and have 
tried all other options, then detention in appropriate conditions, of limited duration and 
with regular judicial review in line with international standards, may be considered as the 
last resort. limited use of detention in appropriate conditions was observed in sweden 
(sampson, mitchell and bowring 2011, 49).
the cap model was primarily designed to identify and describe alternatives that meet 
the policy objectives of detention while supporting the well-being of migrants. it provides 
governments  with  steps  to  achieve  practical  outcomes  through  less  harmful  means. 
however, it also responds to political and symbolic rationales. it increases the political 
saliency of alternatives by providing a forum for data sharing and dialogue on alternative 
to detention policies among governments, while serving as a resource for advocates. the 
model has been the basis for idc engagement with over 50 governments and has helped 
to raise the profile of alternatives within international human rights organizations. it thus 
contributes  to  creating  the  buzz  necessary  to  attract  political  attention  and  stimulate 
action. finally, the model addresses the symbolic rationale that underpins detention by 
using the language of migration management and targeted enforcement to address issues 
of government authority and territorial control. 

conclusion 
immigration detention threatens the well-being of migrants. yet the number of people subject 
to detention is likely to continue to increase as the countries using detention expands and 
their detention capacity grows. despite this trend, government policies regarding territorial 
borders are not absolute but rather are responsive to a range of broader rationales. rather 
than  focusing  solely  on  control  through  confinement,  governments  are  also  concerned 
with  achieving  practical,  political  and  symbolic  outcomes.  these  competing  rationales 
explain why government interest in alternatives to detention has grown in recent years. 
the symbolic potency of detention is a significant political tool in reassuring voters of 
control of borders in uncertain times, but detention also comes with serious human and 
financial costs that expose governments to criticism on moral and human rights grounds. 
criticism can be partly assuaged by the introduction of alternatives which can fulfil the 
practical objectives of detention, especially for vulnerable groups. however, such changes 
risk tinkering at the edges, thus allowing the bulk of the detention regime and the logic of 
border control to remain intact. in the face of these challenges, this paper offers important 
tools  for  understanding  the  factors  influencing  government  policy  decisions  regarding 
alternatives to detention and identifies opportunities to shift from harmful policies towards 
more productive options that support the dignity and security of migrants. 

111

global trends in immigration detention and alternatives