on the margins: noncitizens 
caught in countries experiencing 
violence, conflict and disaster1 

sanjula weerasinghe 
georgetown university

abbie taylor
georgetown university

with sarah drury, pitchaya indravudh, aaron gregg and john flanagan2 
georgetown university

 
executive summary 
today, perhaps more than ever, humanitarian crises permeate the lives 
of millions, triggering increased human movement and repeatedly testing 
the  international  communitys  capacity  to  respond.  stakeholders  within 
the  international  community  have  recognized  that  existing  legal  and 
institutional frameworks for protecting forced migrants are inadequate to 
address the diversity of movements and needs. this article examines the 
situation of noncitizens who are caught in violence, conflict, and disaster, 
and asserts that they are an at-risk population requiring tailored responses. 
recent  history  has  witnessed  numerous  humanitarian  crises  in  which 
noncitizens  have  been  among  those  most  seriously  affected.  with  more 
people than at any other point in history residing outside of their country 
of  origin,  the  presence  of  new  and  sustained  eruptions  of  violence  and 
conflict, and the frequency and intensity of disasters predicted to increase, 
noncitizens  will  continue  to  be  caught  in  countries  experiencing  crises. 
destination countries, as well as origin countries whose citizens are caught 
in crisis situations abroad, must understand the challenges that noncitizens 
may encounter in accessing assistance and protection, and must formulate 
responses to ensure that their needs are adequately accommodated.
while both citizens and noncitizens may encounter difficulties in any given 
humanitarian crisis, research on five recent crisesthe libyan uprising, 
1   the  authors  are  grateful  to  professor  susan  f.  martin  for  providing  the  opportunity  to  undertake  this 
research and for general comments and suggestions on the issue.
2   sarah drury primarily provided research assistance on the libya and syria crises; pitchaya indravudh 
on the thailand crisis; aaron gregg on the japan crisis; and john flanagan on the unites states crisis. the 
authors would also like to thank all the research assistants who provided editorial and research support for 
this paper. 

 2015 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 3 number 1 (2015): 26-57the tohoku earthquake, the tsunami and fukushima nuclear accident in 
japan, flooding in thailand, hurricane sandy in the united states, and 
the on-going conflict in syriademonstrates that a range of factors create 
particular  challenges  for  noncitizens.  factors  related  to  the  underlying 
environment  in  the  country  undergoing  a  crisis  and  the  responses  of 
different actors may exacerbate the vulnerability of noncitizens. moreover, 
different groups of noncitizens manifest distinct protection needs due to 
specific attributes. in a given context, the interaction of these factors leads 
to varying levels of vulnerability for different groups, and the experiences 
of noncitizens in crisis situations implicate a range of fundamental human 
rights. 
promising practices which may reduce the vulnerabilities of noncitizens 
and  their  exposure  to  harm  during  crises  include:  limiting  immigration 
enforcement  activities  in  favor  of  dispensing  life-saving  assistance; 
communication of emergency and relief messages in multiple languages 
and modes; facilitating entry and re-entry; and providing targeted relief 
services. these practices are not limited to countries experiencing crises; 
origin countries have also displayed judicious actions, undertaking bi-lateral 
negotiations to address specific needs and seeking external assistance in 
order to protect their citizens who are caught in crisis situations.  
this article seeks to inform ways to mitigate the vulnerabilities and address 
unmet assistance and protection needs of noncitizens caught in countries 
experiencing  crises.  it  focuses  primarily  on  vulnerabilities  experienced 
during crises, acknowledging the importance of preventative action that 
targets  the  potential  vulnerabilities  and  needs  of  noncitizens.  it  also 
acknowledges that assistance and protection needs often persist beyond the 
abatement of crises and warrant ongoing intervention. the observations 
presented in this paper are drawn from desk research on a limited number 
of situations, and therefore, the article is an introductory attempt to call 
attention to the issues at play when a crisis occurs, rather than an in-depth 
study of the subject. nonetheless, it offers recommendations for alleviating 
the exposure of noncitizens, which include actions aimed at:
  addressing the underlying legal and policy landscape related to crises 
and relevant areas like immigration so as to account for the presence 
and needs of noncitizens;

that address their particular needs and vulnerabilities. 

  ensuring that all categories of noncitizens are able to access, understand 
and  navigate  information  regarding  emergency  and  relief  assistance 
and are able to utilize them; and

  limiting the exposure of noncitizens to harm through targeted measures 

27

on the marginspart  1:  crisis  migration  and  noncitizens  as  an  at-risk 
population
today, perhaps more than ever, humanitarian crises permeate the lives of millions, triggering 
increased human movements and repeatedly testing the international communitys capacity 
to respond. in november 2013, the devastation reaped by typhoon haiyan in the philippines 
affected 14.1 million people and displaced 4.1 million (yonetani et al. 2014). weeks later, 
an  escalation  of  violence  among  political  factions  in  south  sudan  created  widespread 
instability and forced thousands to flee within and across borders, many of whom had only 
recently returned to settle in the country. amid prolonged drought, there is also growing 
concern over severe food insecurity, and the possibility of famine in south sudan (irin 
2014). meanwhile, in syria, almost half of the population is in urgent need of humanitarian 
assistance  due  to  the  armed  conflict,  including  millions  of  internally  displaced  persons 
and those living as refugees in neighboring countries and beyond (idmc 2014b; unhcr 
2014a). and by late-2014, ebola had killed thousands of people and crippled much of 
west africa, prompting guinea, liberia, mali, sierra leone and other countries to adopt 
measures to curtail movement and prevent the spread of the epidemic (who 2014). across 
the atlantic, tens of thousands of children from el salvador, guatemala, honduras and 
mexico have been displaced within their countries and across international borders with 
more than 68,000 apprehended at the us-mexico border in 2014 after undertaking perilous 
journeys. most were escaping pervasive gang and drug cartel violence (unhcr 2014c). 
as  is  evident  from  these  examples,  humanitarian  crisesdescribed  as  any  situation  in 
which there is a widespread threat to life, physical safety, health or basic subsistence that 
is beyond the coping capacity of individuals and the communities in which they reside 
(martin, weerasinghe and taylor 2014)may be triggered by a diverse range of events 
and  processes.  triggers  include  hurricanes,  tsunamis,  earthquakes,  drought,  famine, 
environmental  degradation,  other  impacts  of  climate  change,  epidemics  or  pandemics, 
nuclear and industrial accidents, acts of terrorism, armed conflict, generalized violence, 
and political instability. while these triggers may often constitute the immediate cause 
of a humanitarian crisis, underlying stressors related to the political and socio-economic 
context in a given country or locale, and individual- and community-level agency, resources 
and capacities, generally determine its scale and intensity. 
human  movement  stemming  from  diverse  crises  is  at  unprecedented  levels  and  may 
increase in years to come. the latest statistical compilation from the office of the united 
nations  high  commissioner  for  refugees  (unhcr)  reveals  that  persecution,  conflict, 
generalized  violence,  and  human  rights  violations  alone  had  forcibly  displaced  51.2 
million  individuals  by  the  end  of  2013  (unhcr  2014e;  trk  2014),  representing  the 
highest figures since unhcr first began compiling such statistics (trk 2014). moreover, 
during the five-year period between 2008 and 2012, an estimated 143.9 million people 
in 125 countries were displaced by disasters stemming from rapid-onset weather-related 
and geophysical hazards such as floods, storms, earthquakes and wildfires (yonetani 2012, 
11). these figures do not necessarily capture displacement emanating from technological 
hazards (such as nuclear and industrial accidents), biological hazards (such as epidemics 
and pandemics) and slower-onset processes such as droughts and sea-level rise (idmc 
2014a). in addition, climate change is projected to increase the displacement of people in 
the twenty-first century (ipcc 2014). meanwhile, processes of political change do not only 

28

journal on migration and human securitygenerate instability, but also provoke new movements and protracted needs. 
existing legal and institutional frameworks for protecting forced migrants are inadequate to 
address the diversity of movements and needs. frameworks that were conceived to protect 
those who flee persecution, human rights violations and ongoing conflict, may evolve and 
possess sufficient elasticity to accommodate so-called new phenomena, such as cross-
border displacement deriving from gang and drug cartel violence. even so, they cannot 
accommodate all those who are compelled to flee as a consequence of other triggers, such as 
weather-related, geophysical, technological, and biophysical hazards. this understanding is 
perhaps best captured by the words of the united nations high commissioner for refugees 
in a ministerial-level address to mark the 60th anniversary of the 1951 convention relating 
to the status of refugees: while the nature of forced displacement is rapidly evolving, the 
responses available to the international community have not kept pace.3 
a range of initiatives aims to better understand movements and protection needs in the 
context  of  crises.4 among  these  is  georgetown  universitys  institute  for  the  study  of 
international migrations (isim) project on crisis migration,5 which seeks to discern the 
commonalities in movements and protection needs stemming from diverse humanitarian 
crises as a first step towards enhancing protection and assistance.6 the projects preliminary 
findings relate to a range of thematic areas, including the vulnerabilities and protection 
needs of certain categories of at-risk populations who are not typically singled out as being 
vulnerable.7  this  paper  presents  findings  relating  specifically  to  noncitizens8  caught  in 
countries experiencing crises. 

3    mr. antnio  guterres,  statement  by  mr. antnio  guterres,  united  nations  high  commissioner  for 
refugees, intergovernmental meeting at ministerial level to mark the 60th anniversary of the 1951 convention 
relating to the status of refugees and the 50th anniversary of the 1961 convention on the reduction of 
statelessness (speech, geneva, december 7, 2011), unhcr. http://www.unhcr.org/4ecd0cde9.html.
4    see,  for  example,  the  nansen  initiative,  unhcrs  guidelines  on  temporary  protection  or  stay 
arrangements, and the international organization for migrations migration crisis operation framework. 
5   for more information on georgetown universitys project on crisis migration, supported by the john d. 
and catherine t. macarthur foundation, visit: http://isim.georgetown.edu/crisis. 
6   the project posits three principal ways in which movement occurs in the context of crises: (1) displacement 
as a direct result of a crisis; (2) anticipatory movement in the context of impending crises; and (3) planned 
relocation, particularly for those who might be otherwise trapped in life-threatening situations. displacement 
encompasses those who are directly affected or threatened by a humanitarian crisis and who are compelled 
to move. anticipatory movement encompasses those who move because they anticipate future threats to their 
lives, physical safety, health or subsistence. relocation, particularly for populations that may otherwise be 
trapped in life-threatening situations, encompasses those who are in harms way, but are trapped in place and 
havent moved due to physical, financial, security, logistical, or other reasons that impede movement. these 
movements may be temporary, protracted or permanent, internal or across international borders, and legal or 
(particularly with regard to the first two categories) clandestine. these categories are not intended to operate 
as legal definitions, but rather reflect an attempt to understand movement in the context of humanitarian crises. 
the categories are not mutually exclusive as individuals may move from one to another, or simultaneously 
fall into more than one.
7   other at-risk populations that the research has examined include those who travel by sea, those who are 
trapped in place and require assistance to move out of harms way, and those who are displaced to urban 
areas.
8   the term noncitizen is used in this article to describe persons who are present (regardless of duration or 
legal status) in a country in which they are not citizens. the term includes migrant workers, refugees, asylum 
seekers, stateless persons, students, and others.

29

on the marginsover the last 25 years, the world has witnessed numerous humanitarian crises in which 
noncitizens were among those most seriously affected. the issue first came to prominence 
during  the  gulf  war  in  1990-1991,  which  affected  more  than  one  million  noncitizens 
who  were  residing  in  kuwait,  along  with  hundreds  of  thousands  in  iraq.  fifteen  years 
later in 2006, renewed conflict in lebanon posed considerable challenges for hundreds of 
thousands of refugees and asylum seekers, stateless persons and domestic workers from 
lower-income  countries  (jureidini  2011).  outside  the  middle  east,  post-election  unrest 
in  cte  divoire  displaced  thousands  from  neighboring  countries  in  2010.  many  were 
left to find their own means of exit from the country, as evacuations and humanitarian 
assistance were thwarted by violence (koser 2014). in 2011, when hundreds of thousands 
of migrant workers were caught up in political instability and civil war in libya, the need 
to make provisions to better assist and protect noncitizens in times of crisis surfaced as 
a priority for policymakers. in the months that followed, the devastating consequences 
of  the  earthquake,  tsunami  and  nuclear  disaster  in  japan  along  with  severe  flooding  in 
thailand and the worsening conflict in syria, reified the need among states and the broader 
international community to formulate a coordinated response for noncitizens residing in 
countries in the throes of acute humanitarian crisis.
humanitarian crises triggered by the sudden onset of violence, conflict or disaster have 
called attention to the risks to which noncitizens are exposed in these situations, as well as 
their protection needs. there is a tendency for the protection of noncitizens to fall through 
the cracks because of failure to understand and/or take account of the unique challenges 
they  face,  and  because  extant  frameworks  and  mechanisms  insufficiently  articulate  the 
responsibilities of different actors. in this context, in late 2013, amid mounting academic, 
institutional and policy debates at the un high-level dialogue on international migration 
and  development,  the  united  states  and  the  philippines  launched  a  state-led  initiative 
on migrants in countries in crisis (micic) to improve the capacity of states and other 
stakeholders to prepare for, respond to, alleviate suffering, and protect the dignity and 
rights of migrants caught in countries in situations of acute crises (iom, n.d.).
with this political momentum as a backdrop, this paper seeks to shed light on protection 
implications for noncitizens caught in countries experiencing violence, conflict and disaster 
by examining five prominent crises across three continents between 2011 and 2012: the 
libyan uprising; the tohoku earthquake, tsunami and the fukushima nuclear accident in 
japan; flooding in thailand; hurricane sandy in the united states; and the ongoing conflict 
in syria.9
this paper illustrates that in the context of violence, conflict and disaster:

  noncitizens may be distinctly vulnerable due to a range of factors pertaining to the 
underlying environment in the country experiencing the crisis and the responses of 
different actors. these include: transmission of crisis-related information in modes 
that do not cater to noncitizens; insufficiently-attuned laws and policies; exclusion 

9   these crises were chosen because media reports indicated that significant populations of noncitizens were 
affected in each of these situations. evidence presented in this paper was collected through desk research using 
publicly available sources from international organizations, think-tanks, international nonprofit organizations, 
governments, and media outlets. there are limits on the extent to which it is possible to generalize from these 
examples, and this paper does not use a case study method with the intent of generalizing across all crises.

30

journal on migration and human securityfrom or difficulties accessing or benefiting from relief services; lack of consideration 
of  noncitizens  in  national  frameworks;  actions  of  rogue  authorities  and  private 
actors; targeting due to ethnicity; border restrictions of contiguous countries; and 
lack of origin country mechanisms and capacity for protecting citizens abroad. 

  among  noncitizens,  different  groups  manifest  distinct  protection  needs  due  to 
specific  attributes.  those  with  heightened  vulnerabilities  may  include:  persons 
without immigration status; domestic workers; refugees; asylum seekers; stateless 
persons; and detainees.

  noncitizens may be susceptible to violations of fundamental human rights. 

the paper also describes a handful of promising practices in the context of humanitarian 
crises triggered by violence, conflict and disaster. 
while the analysis emphasizes protection needs and responses during crises, it suggests 
that  greater  awareness  of,  and  attention  to,  the  vulnerabilities  and  protection  needs  of 
noncitizens throughout all phases of a crisis could mitigate harm to these populations (iom 
2014a).10 specific and targeted measures are needed to address vulnerabilities that affect 
noncitizens before a crisis, protection and assistance during a crisis and challenges that 
prevail  following  the  abatement  of  a  crisis.  responses  may  also  need  to  be  tailored  to 
address the diversity of movements and non-movement that occur in the context of crises 
as people may move within a country, into neighboring countries or farther afield, or face 
impediments to moving out of harms way and require assistance to relocate. 
the paper provides an overview of the five crises, describes factors that influenced the 
vulnerability of noncitizens, and concludes with recommendations. 

part 2:  recent crises 

i. libyan uprising 

in mid-february 2011, anti-government protests spread across libya, meeting a violent 
crackdown  from  colonel  muammar  gaddafis  regime  (bbc  news  2011a).  unlike  the 
uprisings  in  egypt  and  tunisia,  libyas  civil  unrest  descended  into  an  armed  conflict 
between government forces and north atlantic treaty organization-backed rebels, which 
continued  until  gaddafis  overthrow  in  october  2011. the  main  period  of  crisis  ended 
with the fall of the gaddafi regime, but weak rule of law and widespread insecurity has 
continued with suicide attacks, frequent abductions, and clashes between rival militias in 
and around towns and cities throughout the country. 

10   while this paper focuses primarily on the needs of noncitizens during crises, pre-crisis practices, as well 
as  the  experiences  and  protection  needs  of  noncitizens  in  post-crisis  situations  warrants  further  research 
and analysis. it should also be noted that this desk study focuses primarily on the actions of states, which 
have principal responsibility for assisting and protecting noncitizens. other relevant stakeholders to consider 
include:  regional  institutions  and  cooperation  mechanisms;  international  organizations  and  coordination 
mechanisms, such as the inter-agency standing committee; employers, recruitment agencies and other private 
sector actors; civil society, including the red cross and red crescent movement; workers organizations; and 
noncitizens and members of the diaspora.

31

on the marginslibya was a popular country of destination and transit for noncitizens due to its oil wealth 
and proximity to europe.  some estimates before 2011 indicate the presence of up to 2.5 
million noncitizens, including 1.2 million without immigration status (aghazarm, quesada 
and tishler 2012). thousands of foreigners occupied high-skilled jobs in the oil industry, 
health, and education sectors. however, the majority of noncitizens residing in libya at the 
time of the crisis were men from egypt, chad, tunisia, niger, mali and sudan working in 
lesser-skilled occupations in the construction, agriculture, oil and service industries (human 
rights watch 2011a).11 libya was also a transit and destination country for refugees and 
asylum  seekers,  and  a  recipient  country  of  boats  of  mixed  populations  prevented  from 
entering europe (frelick 2009). according to unhcr, at the beginning of 2011, there 
were around 8,000 registered refugees and approximately 3,000 asylum seekers residing in 
libya12 from countries such as cte divoire, eritrea, ethiopia, iraq, palestine, somalia, 
sudan and western sahara (amnesty international 2011).
prior  to  the  crisis,  the  protection  landscape  for  noncitizens  inside  libya  was  far  from 
favorable, colored by human rights violations, racial discrimination, and an uneven regional 
balance  of  power  (human  rights  watch  2011b).  existing  protection  challenges  were 
aggravated by the outbreak of political unrest and armed conflict. the violence generated 
widespread suffering and mass displacement within and across the libyan border, affecting 
a significant population of noncitizens.13 overall, between late february 2011 and january 
2012, 790,000 noncitizens fled to neighboring tunisia, egypt, chad and niger, as well as 
italy and malta, to escape the escalating violence, although many of these countries were 
themselves experiencing some degree of political and economic instability (aghazarm, 
quesada and tishler 2012, 11).14 forty-five percent of those who fled (316,321) sought 
refuge in a country that is not their country of origin (iom 2011a). due to lack of financial 
resources and travel documents, the vast majority of noncitizens had no personal means of 
exiting (ibid., 10). a total of 550,000 people were displaced within libya in 2011 (unhcr 
2014b), a portion of whom were believed to be migrant workers, asylum seekers, refugees 
and  stateless  persons  (fiddyan-qasimyeh  2011).  others,  particularly  noncitizens  from 
sub-saharan africa, were trapped or detained inside the country with little or no recourse, 
a  phenomenon  which  only  increased  amid  growing  xenophobia,  fear  and  mistrust  of 
foreigners after the conflict began (nebehay 2011). human rights groups expressed concern 
that these persons faced arbitrary detention and abuse (amnesty international 2013c).

11   migrant workers in libya also included tens of thousands from asian countries (aghazarm, quesada and 
tishler 2012).
12   unhcr suspects that the true number is higher, given that many do not register. in 2007, although 12,000 
refugees, asylum seekers, internally displaced and stateless persons in lybia were registered with unhcr, 
it estimated that there were close to 30,000 persons in need of protection residing in the country. see http://
www.nationalityforall.org/libya.
13   in libya, distinctions between different types of noncitizens (migrant workers, refugees, asylum seekers, 
stateless persons, diplomats, business travelers, tourists and students) are often blurred.
14   while 247,167 libyan nationals crossed into egypt during the crisis and 626, 010 went to tunisia, the 
international organization for migration (iom) notes that most of these movements were circular, with the 
vast majority of libyans returning home by the end of august 2011. notably, very few libyans sought shelter 
at temporary camps on the border. almost no libyans were found among those arriving by boat on the shores 
of italy and malta, a mode of movement that comprised 3.9 percent of the overall number of people fleeing 
libya (aghazarm, quesada and tishler 2012, 11).

32

journal on migration and human securityii. triple disaster in japan

on march 11, 2011, a 9.0 magnitude earthquake struck the japanese coastline, triggered 
a 30-foot tsunami and decimated communities primarily in the northeastern prefectures 
of iwate, miyagi, and fukushima (bartel 2011). these natural occurrences prompted one 
of the worst nuclear disasters since chernobyl at the fukushima daiichi nuclear power 
station.  the  earthquake  and  tsunami  killed  more  than  15,800  and  injured  over  6,000 
(izumi 2012b). the bulk of the death toll was associated with the tsunami (ferris and sols 
2013). no deaths have been attributed to the nuclear explosion or the resultant radiation 
release, although stress and anxiety related to the incident have been credited with creating 
many health problems for those affected (conca 2014). approximately 465,000 people 
were evacuated (ferris and sols 2013). the economic cost of the crisis is estimated at 
$360 billion (ibid.), with 250,000 buildings damaged or destroyed, 4.4 million households 
without  electricity  and  2.3  million  without  access  to  water  in  the  immediate  aftermath 
(koike 2011).
at the time of the triple disaster, japan was home to roughly 2,078,480 noncitizens (izumi 
2012b).  chinese  citizens  constituted  the  largest  enclave  in  japan  with  south  koreans, 
brazilians,  and  filipinos  comprising  other  sizeable  populations  (ibid).  the  noncitizen 
population included roughly 141,774 foreign students, the majority hailing from surrounding 
asian countries, most significantly china and south korea, and to a lesser extent taiwan, 
vietnam and malaysia (jasso 2010). the population of refugees and asylum seekers in 
japan is much smaller than other classes of noncitizens: at the end of 2010, japan was 
home to just 2,586 refugees and persons in refugee-like situations, 3,078 asylum seekers, 
and 1,397 stateless persons (unhcr 2011).15 
an estimated 700,000 noncitizens were residing in areas that were in some way affected 
by  the  triple  crisis  (iom  2011b)  with  approximately  33,000  in  the  three  main  affected 
prefectures, 200,000 in the surrounding prefectures and 423,000 visiting the area (izumi 
2012b). the earthquake and tsunami killed 2316 and injured 173 noncitizens (ibid.), while 
an  estimated  470,000  foreigners  are  reported  to  have  left  japan  during  the  time  of  the 
disaster (duncan 2013). many refugees and asylum seekers also chose to leave (koike 
2011). there is little additional aggregate-level information on noncitizens affected by the 
crisis. government efforts to track the missing indicate that japan worked with foreign 
embassies to compile a list of at least 600 missing noncitizens and that this information was 
furnished to the local police and rescue administration (iom 2011b). 

iii. flooding in thailand

from august  to  december  2011,  thailand  experienced  its  worst  flooding  in  50  years, 
creating devastating effects for residents and the economy and prompting the government 
to  execute  countrywide  disaster  management  and  relief  measures.  the  floods  were  a 
byproduct of four major storms, which resulted in the countrys highest level of rainfall 

15   the asylum seeker figure is based on the number of pending applications.
16   this figure does not include those missing and presumed dead. for more information on this see damage 
measures  and  police  countermeasures  report,  accessible  at:  http://www.npa.go.jp/archive/keibi/biki/
higaijokyo_e.pdf. 

33

on the marginsin  more  than  60  years,  and  also  heavily  affected  the  neighboring  countries  of  laos, 
cambodia and vietnam, all of which had citizens residing in thailand.  as a result of the 
floods, thailand incurred $45.7 billion in costs as of december 2011 (world bank 2011; 
the economist 2012). sixty-six out of thailands 77 provinces were critically impacted 
(bhoocha-oom and dixon 2012). the central region, which generates a large portion of 
the countrys economic output, experienced the longest period of flooding (pongsudhirak 
2011; chariyaphan 2012). 
thailand  has  historically  hosted  large  populations  of  noncitizens,  especially  from 
neighboring countries, who seek refuge from conflict and violence or greater opportunity 
within its growing economy (jones and im-em 2011).  at the end of 2009, an estimated 
3.5 million noncitizens resided in thailand, comprised of refugees and asylum seekers, 
ethnic  minorities  without  thai  citizenship  (unesco  2014),  permanent  residents, 
students and migrant workers (iom 2011c). low-skilled migrant workers from myanmar, 
cambodia, and laos represent the largest population of noncitizens in thailand. these 
workers are primarily employed in sectors such as agriculture, construction and fishing 
(ibid.). at the end of 2010, there were an estimated 2.4 million noncitizens originating from 
these countries, with 1.4 million (almost 60 percent) designated as unregistered migrant 
workers17 or family members. according to the international organization for migration 
(iom), 141,076 refugees and asylum seekers were living in thailand in 2010, and of this 
population,  95,330  refugees  resided  in  camps  along  the  thai-myanmar  border  (ibid.). 
thailand is not a signatory to the 1951 united nations convention relating to the status 
of refugees. thailand considers individuals whose visas have expired to be unauthorized 
immigrants and they are therefore subject to arrest, detention, and deportation (den otter 
2007, 14; frelick and saltsman 2012).
overall, the floods affected 13 million people (bhoocha-oom and dixon 2012), with 1.5 
million displaced (yonetani 2012) and over 800 killed (agence-france presse 2011). a 
demographic  breakdown  of  these  statistics,  particularly  the  total  number  of  foreigners 
impacted  or  displaced  by  the  crisis,  is  unavailable.  however,  out  of  the  3.5  million 
noncitizens estimated to be living in thailand, one million migrant workers are believed 
to have lived in areas affected by the floods (koser 2014). aid workers put the number of 
migrant workers stranded due to the disaster at 600,000 (ibid.). the floods significantly 
impacted industrial parks in ayutthaya and pathum thani, which employ large numbers 
of  migrant  workers,  often  in  unsafe  living  and  working  conditions  (gemenne,  brcker 
and ionesco 2012; iom 2011c). severe flooding in these areas put many migrant workers 
temporarily or permanently out of work (iom 2011c). while only a few refugee camps 
along  the  thai-myanmar  border  were  affected  (adra  2011),  unhcr  estimates  that 
the  floods  also  displaced  2,000  urban  refugees  and  asylum  seekers  living  in  bangkok 
(mckinsey 2011). 

iv. hurricane sandy in the united states

on october 27, 2012, hurricane sandy, the largest atlantic hurricane on record, struck the 

17   unregistered migrant workers refers to migrants who work in the country but do not have a valid work 
permit, though some may have a temporary thai identification card procured through a previous formal 
registration or valid work permit.

34

journal on migration and human securitydensely-populated east coast of the united states, creating widespread devastation for the 
residents of new york city, the new jersey coastline, and southern connecticut (webley 
2012). this disaster, which media outlets and meteorologists termed a super storm, left 
more than 130 people dead in the us, with fatalities recorded elsewhere in haiti, cuba, 
puerto rico, the bahamas, the dominican republic, and canada (rogers 2012). hurricane 
sandy forced some 450,000 people to evacuate damaged and destroyed homes (susman, 
tanfani and simon 2012). overall, the disaster cost around $65 billion in damages, making 
it the most expensive storm in us history after hurricane katrina (noaa, n.d.).
some of the hardest-hit areas in new york and new jersey contained large immigrant 
populations. the foreign-born population of new york city is the largest of any city in 
the united states (us census bureau 2011), at just over three million people. roughly 51 
percent of the foreign-born are naturalized us citizens. of the foreign-born residents of 
new york city, 51.5 percent come from latin america and the caribbean; 27.5 percent 
from asia; and 15.9 percent from europe (ibid.). an analysis of data from 2000 to 2006 
conducted by jeffrey s. passel estimated there were 535,000 unauthorized immigrants and 
374,000 unauthorized workers in new york city, comprising 10 percent of the resident 
workforce  (kallick  2007).  meanwhile,  in  the  nine  new  jersey  counties  hardest  hit  by 
sandy, the foreign-born population made up an average of 25 percent of the population 
in 2011, as compared with 21 percent of the population in the state overall (us census 
bureau 2011). in new jersey, unauthorized workers comprised around 8.6 percent of the 
states workforce (approximately 400,000 workers) in 2010 (passel and cohn 2011). 
there are no comprehensive statistics that detail sandys impact on noncitizens. however, 
a  nongovernmental  organization  survey  of  416  self-identified  immigrants  living  in  the 
disaster-affected areas of staten island and suffolk county, new york, revealed that one in 
three of those surveyed suffered damage to their home and/or personal property.18 obstacles 
to accessing assistance included confusion over eligibility, language barriers and fear of 
interacting with authorities (torrens 2012). 
another  issue  affecting  the  protection  of  noncitizens  was  in  the  enforcement  of  labor 
law in the post-disaster recovery period. as in previous disasters, immigrant day labor 
was a key flank in the initial cleanup efforts. a survey of 11 workers rights organizations 
conducted by the city university of new york found that, despite increased outreach by 
the us department of labor and the state labor departments of new jersey and new york, 
more than three quarters reported the occurrence of wage theft, and 64 percent reported 
significant workplace injuries during the cleanup period (cordero-guzman and pantaleon 
2013).

v. the conflict in syria 

since march 2011, peaceful protests against endemic corruption, inequality and brutality, 
have met with violent backlash, persecution, and suffering at the hands of government 

18   according to the organization, make the road new york, this figure includes foreign-born citizens who 
later obtained us citizenship, as well as persons who were foreign-born and not naturalized, and thus were 
considered noncitizens. a little over 5 percent of those surveyed were from puerto rico, and thus were us 
citizens at birth (make the road new york 2012, 16). 

35

on the marginsforces and non-state actors intent on disrupting civilian life and reaping destruction. in 
july 2012, the international committee of the red cross (icrc) declared a situation of 
non-international armed conflict in syria (icrc 2012). shelling, bomb attacks and fierce 
fighting  continue  to  devastate  major  cities,  towns,  villages  and  camps,  with  countless 
reports  of  house  raids,  arbitrary  arrests  and  detention,  disappearances,  sexual  violence 
and  summary  executions.  meanwhile,  the  nature  of  the  conflict  has  severely  restricted 
humanitarian access to both citizen and noncitizen populations inside syria. 
more than three years since the unrest began, syria is in the grip of a humanitarian crisis 
that has killed more than 191,000 people and internally displaced over 7.6 million.19 others 
remain trapped, unable to move out of harms way and without access to basic supplies. 
over  three  million  people  have  fled  the  country,  the  majority  of  them  to  neighboring 
lebanon, jordan, turkey, iraq and egypt, while others have risked their lives attempting to 
cross the mediterranean in a desperate bid to reach europe.20 
hundreds of thousands of noncitizens have been affected by the crisis since 2011. the 
vast majority are refugees, asylum seekers and stateless persons, but also migrant workers, 
students, journalists, and aid workers. of the 540,000 palestinian refugees registered in 
syria, approximately 270,000 have been internally displaced, while more than 50,000 have 
fled to lebanon. fewer have managed to cross the border to other neighboring countries, 
such as egypt and gaza (unrwa 2014a). of those still in syria, more than 18,000 remain 
inside the yarmouk refugee camp in damascus, which has largely remained under siege 
since  early  2013  (unrwa  2014b). almost  all  of  the  palestinian  refugees  in  syria  are 
reported to be in need of humanitarian assistance (unrwa 2014a). with a resurgence 
of violence in iraq and entry restrictions imposed by neighboring countries, thousands of 
iraqi refugees in syria also face limited options to escape from harm (unhcr 2014a).  in 
addition to refugee populations, a sizable population of migrant workers has been affected 
by the crisis. in 2010, syrian labor officials estimated the number of domestic workers 
to be between 75,000 and 100,000, primarily consisting of women from indonesia, the 
philippines and ethiopia (irin 2012a). in early 2013, the iom, which has assisted with 
evacuations and repatriations of migrant workers from syria, estimated that there could be 
up to 120,000 migrant workers in the country (iom 2013).

part 3:  protection implications 
this section discusses the experiences of noncitizens in the five crises and identifies some 
of the factors that impacted their vulnerability. these factors are analyzed on two levels: 
(1) those that are a product of the surrounding environment, such as risks pertaining to 
the  underlying  conditions  in  the  country  experiencing  the  crisis  and  the  responses  of 

19    for  the  latest  statistics  on  the  situation  in  syria,  see:  united  nations  office  for  the  coordination  of 
humanitarian affairs, syria crisis, http://syria.unocha.org/. see also internal displacement monitoring 
centre  (idmc),  syria,  http://www.internal-displacement.org/middle-east-and-north-africa/syria/.  note 
that due to the restrictions on access to syria, numbers reported by the idmc of internally displaced persons 
have not been updated since september 2013. current numbers are thought to be considerably higher.
20    unhcr,  syria  regional  refugee  response:  inter-agency  information  sharing  portal,  http://data.
unhcr.org/syrianrefugees/regional.php. between january and november 2014 alone, over 200,000 people 
have crossed the mediterranean, with almost half from syria and eritrea (unhcr 2014d).

36

journal on migration and human securitydiverse actors; and (2) those that stem from attributes specific to non-citizens or particular 
groups of noncitizens. in each of the five crises, factors on both levels converged to create 
complications for noncitizens. this analysis sheds light on fundamental human rights that 
may be compromised in crisis situations and a handful of these rights are also highlighted 
in this section. 

i. environment-level factors and responses of diverse actors

the vulnerabilities of noncitizens during humanitarian crises may be influenced by the 
underlying economic, social, political, and legal environment in the country experiencing 
a crisis, as well as the actions of government authorities and private actors. 

transmission of crisis-related information

lack of access to the internet or telecommunications may limit the ability to receive crisis-
related information. further, the limitations of relying solely on such forms of communication 
are exacerbated when coupled with language barriers faced by noncitizens affected by a 
crisis. the crises in japan, the united states and thailand speak to this dynamic. 
during the crisis in japan, the government provided critical information on its website and 
official facebook page (iom 2011b) and the radio network broadcasted disaster-related 
information in 17 languages (izumi 2012a; yamamoto 2013).  in addition, phone signals 
were cut to allow more bandwidth for emergency services to communicate (kaufmann and 
penciakova 2011). asylum seekers and refugees however, seemed to have had difficulties 
procuring reliable information (koike 2011). 
where  technology  proves  inadequate  in  reaching  foreign-born  populations,  outreach 
operations may be effective particularly in reaching those who are unwilling and/or unable 
to leave their homes. in the united states during hurricane sandy, a nongovernmental 
organization concerned primarily with asian communities conducted door-to-door outreach 
in chinatown to check on housebound residents and provide them with information in the 
appropriate language (mok 2012). 
although the thai government provided some relief and relocation assistance to noncitizens, 
many were unable to benefit from this assistance due to, among other things, a lack of clear 
communication and information in their native language (bhoocha-oom and dixon 2012). 
many  migrant  workers  possessed  little  information  about  available  rescue  shelters  and 
consequently could not access services (ibid.). even if they were able to reach shelters, 
some migrant workers were turned away due to language barriers (mahtani 2011). 

insufficiently-attuned laws and policies 

immigration and other laws and policies that are inadequately attuned to the protection needs 
of noncitizens in crises may heighten vulnerability. continued immigration enforcement 
in  these  circumstances  may  place  individuals  in  perilous  situations  by  restricting  their 
mobility or compelling them to make adverse decisions in order to preserve their ability to 
remain and work in the country. thailand, syria and japan provide examples. 

37

on the marginsin thailand, work permit stipulations and related policies limited the mobility of noncitizens 
and  their  access  to  information. at  the  time  of  the  floods,  more  than  500,000  migrant 
workers held permits that restricted them to designated zones (mahtani 2011). during the 
floods, police and immigration officials continued to enforce movement-related restrictions 
despite the ministry of labor temporarily voiding these policies (ibid.). moreover, although 
the floods damaged many businesses, migrant workers were reluctant to seek alternative 
employment  because  doing  so  would  result  in  losing  a  work  permit  and  entering  into 
unauthorized status (koser 2014).
for domestic workers in syria, an exit permit is required in order to leave the country and 
can only be obtained by the employers consent and a fee paid to immigration officials 
(russeau 2012; irin 2012a). without receiving reimbursement for the recruitment costs of 
migrant workers, some employers refused to give permission to grant a permit, presenting 
an obstacle for women trying to escape the conflict zone (torres 2012; sevilla 2013). in 
september 2012, however, after a visit from a delegation from the philippines, the syrian 
government agreed to waive the exit permit and fee for filipino nationals (the vast majority 
of  whom  were  female  domestic  workers)  and  posted  the  announcement  in  newspapers 
(center for migrant advocacy 2014). between march 2011 and september 2013, more 
than 4,500 filipino workers had been repatriated from syria (esplanada 2013). the fate of 
thousands of other domestic workers thought to be residing in syria remains unknown and, 
thus far, the syrian government has not waived exit visas for any other nationality. for the 
many domestic workers who reside in syria without authorization, there is no means of 
obtaining an exit permit. 
although  the  japanese  government  facilitated  re-entry  processes  for  some  classes  of 
noncitizens  (izumi  2011a),  asylum  seekers  and  refugees  appear  to  have  been  excluded 
from similar accommodations (koike 2011). according to a representative from the japan 
association for refugees, this presented difficult predicaments for many including having 
to  choose  between  staying  in  the  country  during  the  crisis,  returning  to  their  countries 
of origin where they may face persecution, traveling to another country and potentially 
jeopardizing their application for refugee status, or breaking up families  (koike 2011).

exclusion of noncitizens from relief services 

in crisis situations, response and recovery assistance and programming may not cater to 
the particular needs of noncitizens. moreover, they may be excluded from relief services. 
thailand and the united states provide examples. 
reports  indicate  that  rescue  shelters  provided  by  the  thai  government  were  largely 
inaccessible to noncitizens due to geographic isolation from migrant worker-concentrated 
areas, lack of translation services, and the inability of noncitizens to present identification 
documents  either  due  to  immigration  status  or  loss  of  documents  in  the  floods  (htwe 
2011;  mahtani  2011). there  are  also  reports  that  the  severity  of  the  crisis  forced thai 
authorities to prioritize their own citizens and turn away migrant workers from evacuation 
centers (mahtani 2011). the government made some efforts to respond to this issue by 
establishing at least a couple of shelters specifically for noncitizens. one, which was set up 
in nakhon pathom (and was later moved to ratchaburi due to fears of further flooding), 

38

journal on migration and human securityprovided relief supplies and free health care. however, it quickly filled to capacity and 
became overcrowded with roughly 432 people (ibid.; ashayagachat 2011; usaid 2011). 
a second shelter established by the department of employment and ministry of labor also 
provided basic humanitarian supplies as well as some tailored services including temporary 
employment placement and assistance with returning to countries of origin. the shelters 
limited capacities still left thousands of migrant workers without assistance (bhoocha-oom 
and dixon 2012; mahtani 2011).
in the united states, while certain types of assistance were made available to noncitizens, 
only 22 percent of 416 self-identified immigrants surveyed in the disaster-affected areas of 
staten island and suffolk county, new york applied for us or local government assistance 
(make  the  road  new  york  2012,  17).  one  contributing  factor  was  that  unauthorized 
immigrants  were  not  eligible  for  federal  cash  assistance  unless  there  was  a  us  citizen 
child in the household. however, all affected persons were eligible for crisis counseling 
and non-monetary assistance, such as food and blankets (fema 2004). confusion over the 
eligibility guidelines was the most frequently cited reason for not applying for aid (llenas 
2012).

lack of consideration for noncitizens in national frameworks

the absence of national frameworks to account for the assistance and protection needs 
of  noncitizens  in  humanitarian  crises  may  aggravate  their  vulnerability.  for  example, 
the exclusion of noncitizens from thailands relief services arguably reflects an overall 
lack of consideration of them by the thai government in disaster management planning 
(hall 2012b). thailand does not explicitly include this population as part of the countrys 
permanent disaster management infrastructure, and no government agency was assigned 
responsibility for supporting this population during the floods (hall 2012a). representatives 
from the ministry of foreign affairs and the immigration bureau were notably missing 
from the national disaster and prevention committee, which is the governments primary 
emergency planning apparatus (chariyaphan 2012).

actions of rogue authorities and private actors 

the actions of corrupt authorities may elevate the vulnerability of noncitizens by creating 
added costs and impeding the ability to escape harm. this is also the case where regulatory 
environments allow private actors such as employers to confiscate travel documents with 
impunity. both thailand and libya provide examples. 
immigration authorities at the thailand-myanmar border made it more difficult for migrant 
workers to escape the floods by reportedly demanding fees between thb 12,000 and 15,000 
(us $400-$500) for crossing the border (koser 2014). a large number of migrant workers 
were employed in industrial parks in thailand with poor living and working conditions 
and salaries below the national minimum (iom 2011c). at the time of the crisis, there were 
reports that employers failed to pay outstanding wages and withheld travel documents, 
with some even demanding high fees for their return (amnesty international 2012).
lawlessness persisted in parts of libya, with the government unable and/or unwilling to 

39

on the marginscontrol militias in the country. smuggling of sub-saharan noncitizens by libyan gangs 
continued across the countrys borders (murray 2012a). media reports suggest that local 
militias cheated noncitizens trying to escape from libya out of their savings by falsely 
promising them passage by boat to europe (ba 2013). 

ethnic profiling 

in  crisis  situations,  if  hostility  towards  otherness  or  perceived  outsiders  increases, 
noncitizens may become targets of xenophobic violence and discrimination. this was an 
issue in libya. 
deeply-rooted racial discrimination against sub-saharan africans within libyan society 
was exacerbated by the politicization of race and ethnicity, as certain groups of foreigners 
became associated with distinct political factions embroiled in the conflict. colonel gaddafi 
recruited some sub-saharan africans and ethnic minorities into his armed forces, in many 
cases through coercion with the promise of identification papers (fahim and kirkpatrick 
2011; murray 2012b). following reports that african mercenaries had been recruited to fight 
on behalf of colonel gaddafi, migrant workers, refugees and asylum seekers from chad, 
niger, mali, nigeria, and other sub-saharan countries became targets of arbitrary arrest and 
violence by rebel factions and vigilante groups (human rights watch 2011a). non-arab 
minority groups such as the tebu, tuareg and amazighsome of whom may be stateless 
(van waas 2013)were also vulnerable to marginalization and racial discrimination at the 
height of the violence. in particular, tuaregs in awbari reported experiencing attacks and 
looting on a weekly basis due to the alleged involvement of some as mercenaries in pro-
gaddafi forces (irin 2012b).21 

border restrictions of contiguous neighboring countries

in times of crisis, particularly in conflict situations when the need to cross borders in order 
to escape harm is often greater, restrictions on entry to contiguous neighboring countries 
may disproportionately affect noncitizens. for example, restrictions of countries bordering 
syria  have  heightened  risk  of  harm  for  refugees.  while  lebanon  allowed  intermittent 
entry by palestinian refugees until the recent imposition of visa restrictions on all refugees 
from syria, jordan has refused entry to palestinians since early 2013. this has left many 
palestinians with limited options: to remain inside the conflict zone or risk traveling across 
the country to attempt crossing to lebanon. iraqis have faced similar problems in reaching 
safety, compelling some to return prematurely to iraq and others to remain inside syria 
(middle east monitor 2014).

mechanisms and capacity for protecting citizens abroad

noncitizens whose countries of origin do not have policies and mechanisms in place to 
assist citizens caught in humanitarian crises in other countries may face increased exposure 

21   see also, report of the united nations inter-agency mission to southern libya, november 15-18, 2011, 
on file with the authors

40

journal on migration and human securityto harm. for example, during the initial stages of the libyan crisis bangladeshis reportedly 
ran  into  difficulties  procuring  passports  and  travel  documents,  and  accessing  embassy 
personnel (bbc news 2011b). in thailand, there were reports of burmese embassy officials 
denying services to flood-affected burmese citizens based on the fact that they had left 
myanmar in breach of immigration laws (hall 2012b, 8). 
the vulnerability of noncitizens is also affected by the capacity and know-how of their 
country of origin to provide assistance. with some notable exceptions, noncitizens from 
developing  countries  may  be  relatively  more  vulnerable  than  those  from  developed 
countries as their diplomatic missions may have poorer emergency infrastructure and may 
therefore need external assistance from other countries, intergovernmental organizations 
and/or civil society.
in  libya,  the  evacuation  of  high-skilled  british  and  canadians,  among  others,  began 
early-on  in  the  crisis  and  was  generally  characterized  by  fewer  complications  than  the 
experiences of chadians, for example, who were forced to travel in poor conditions and 
required  substantial  assistance  from  humanitarian  organizations  (williams  and  millar 
2011; aghazarm, quesada and tishler 2012). south korea also employs a robust set of 
overseas protections for its citizens abroad through its ministry of foreign affairs (young-
ho 2012). among the support services are programs to provide citizens with emergency 
cash assistance and a series of emergency communications programs, including the travel 
advisory system, safe travel campaign, traveler registration system and dissemination 
of safety information via text message (ibid.). in japan, the korean government issued its 
rapid deployment team, which mobilized evacuation transportation, including military 
aircraft and coastguard boats, primarily for korean citizens within 20 kilometers of the 
disaster zone (asiaone 2011). similarly, the philippines has chartered flights to evacuate 
citizens and deployed high-level delegations to countries experiencing crisis such as syria 
and libya to negotiate and facilitate safe removal of filipino citizens (reyes 2012). in an 
effort to assist its citizens residing in the united states, the mexican government filled 
some of the gap in access to services following hurricane sandy. the mexican consulate 
gave around $500 in cash to each affected citizen, replaced lost documents and provided 
psychosocial support (24 horas 2013).22 

ii. attributes specific to particular groups of noncitizens 

the attributes of certain groups of noncitizens may create unique challenges. depending 
on the crisis situation, these attributes may translate into varying degrees of vulnerability. 
groups  that  are  differentially  vulnerable  based  on  distinct  attributes  are  distinguished 
below. 

noncitizens without immigration status

persons residing in a country without immigration status may face unique challenges during 
violence, conflict and disaster. for example, their status may inhibit the ability to access 
or benefit from relief services, such as emergency assistance or evacuation. where fear of 

22   claudia zamora, mexican consulate, personal interview, 4 april 2014.

41

on the marginsgovernment authorities prevails, the vulnerabilities of unauthorized noncitizens may be 
exacerbated. in order to avoid authorities and reduce the chance of arrest and deportation, 
the  unauthorized  may  take  actions  that  aggravate  their  own  vulnerabilities  or  increase 
their exposure to harm, such as by remaining in crisis-affected areas or failing to seek 
assistance. lack of knowledge of the circumstances and whereabouts of the unauthorized 
may also impede authorities from providing relief to these populations. hurricane sandy, 
the flooding in thailand and the conflict in syria provide examples. 
in thailand, many noncitizens decided to stay in flood-affected areas due to fear of police and 
immigration officials and the risk of being arrested, deported, or jeopardizing prospects of 
future employment (koser 2014). as noted previously, the restrictive regulatory environment 
for lesser-skilled workers residing in thailand also resulted in authorized workers being 
trapped within flood-affected areas, as movement restrictions were ordinarily tied to work 
permits (irin 2011). 
in the united states, while a certain amount of temporary relief was available for those 
without immigration status, including crisis counseling, disaster-related legal services and 
other forms of non-cash emergency aid, many people were unaware or confused as to the 
extent of their eligibility and whether or not their coming forward to receive aid would 
put them or their families in danger of deportation (torrens 2012). fear of approaching 
authorities for assistance was also an issue in mixed-status families, particularly if the only 
us citizen in the family was an infant or child reliant on unauthorized family members to 
navigate eligibility guidelines to seek support on their behalf (make the road new york 
2012).
fear of authorities may also prompt the unauthorized in particular to use illegal brokers, 
human smuggling networks and other clandestine means to escape harm, becoming easy 
prey for exploitation. for example, migrant workers in thailand hired illegal brokers to 
transport them in and out of the country using clandestine routes at costs between thb 
2,500 to 4,000 (us $80 to $130) per person (hall 2012a). they traveled by night in large 
trucks that held up to 150 people, and were highly susceptible to exploitation by immigration 
officials in myanmar and thailand, as well as burmese militia groups (irin 2011). 
in syria, where some 90 percent of migrant workers from the philippines were thought to 
reside without immigration status in 2012, officials from the philippine government have 
struggled  to  locate  the  whereabouts  of  female  domestic  workers.  government  officials 
from the philippines have attempted to reach out to those in major cities through radio 
announcements and leaflet campaigns. however, there are few records of the locations of 
these women, who appear to be scattered throughout the country and living in the midst 
of conflict in the homes of employers who may or may not release them from their jobs 
(sevilla 2013; mcgeown 2012).

female domestic workers

isolation and lack of access to social networks may impact the extent to which noncitizens 
are able to access protection and assistance in crisis settings. while isolation may stem 
from language barriers and other factors such as fear of arrest and deportation, it may also 

42

journal on migration and human securitybe exacerbated by the nature of employment. 
as noted above, female domestic workers often work in isolated conditions. they have 
been described as invisible due to their confinement to employers homes and their dispersal 
within countries of destination (iasc gender sub-working group 2011). isolated domestic 
workers may have limited access to information in crisis situations and may encounter 
difficulties in escaping harm, particularly in contexts where their travel documents and 
mobile phones are confiscated (iom 2012). 
in april 2012, as the fighting in syria intensified, a domestic worker from the philippines 
was allegedly killed by sniper fire as she tried to flee from her employer in homs to seek 
shelter at the philippine embassy in damascus (russeau 2012). other domestic workers 
who  had  fled  syria  reported  having  experienced  forced  relocation  with  employers  to 
lebanon, and heightened abuse and exploitation at the hands of employers taking advantage 
of diminished regulations amid the crisis situation (habbab 2014).23 

stateless persons, refugees and asylum seekers 

noncitizens  who  are  unable  or  unwilling  to  avail  themselves  of  the  protection  of  their 
country of origin or residence and those who are not considered nationals by any country 
may face additional challenges in accessing assistance and protection. this was apparent 
in both the libyan and syrian crises. 
refugees and asylum seekers who were able to flee the fighting in libya, largely from 
eritrea, somalia and sudan, were assisted by unhcr at border camps in neighboring 
egypt and tunisia (ambroso 2012, 6-7). around 900 refugees and 350 asylum seekers 
remained in the salloum border camp in egypt some eighteen months after they became 
secondarily  displaced  as  durable  solutions  remained elusive  (abughazaleh  and al achi 
2013). 
in syria, hundreds of thousands of palestinian refugees have been displaced, many of whom 
have been trapped inside besieged areas without food and medical care (unrwa 2014c). 
for those attempting to seek refuge in neighboring countries, options are limited, as jordan 
has denied entry to palestinians possessing only a syrian travel document since late 2012.24 
while lebanon continues to allow intermittent access to palestinians, they remain exposed 
to heightened vulnerabilities due to border closures, barriers to legal migration, threats of 
deportation and limited humanitarian assistance (human rights watch 2014). 
also  in  syria,  tens  of  thousands  of  iraqi  refugees  who  once  fled  sectarian  violence  in 
their country have faced the dilemma of risking return to an increasingly unstable iraq, 
remaining in syria amid ongoing conflict, or traveling illicitly by land, air or sea to other 
countries in search of safety. while more than 50,000 iraqis were reported to have returned 
to iraq in late 2013, little is known about the fate of around 149,000 estimated to be in 

23   another example of the way in which this population was affected in a crisis situation is the 2006 conflict 
in lebanon, when thousands of female domestic workers from south and southeast asia were caught up in 
the violence (irin 2006; jureidini 2011).
24   note that some palestinian refugees residing in syria have jordanian citizenship, which would allow 
them to cross the border into jordan (amnesty international 2013a). 

43

on the marginssyria. unhcr reported that it was assisting 28,300 iraqi refugees inside syria in late 2013 
(unhcr 2014a). 

noncitizens in detention

noncitizens may suffer from arbitrary arrests and heightened abuses in detention during 
times of crisis, particularly in situations where chaos and criminality prevail. those who 
are already detained at the height of a crisis may also be particularly vulnerable to harm, 
especially if detention centers are affected and enveloped in the crisis. 
in libya, thousands of noncitizens were reportedly subject to arbitrary arrests and held in 
deplorable conditions, which included being burned, beaten with electrical cables, housed 
in overcrowded rooms, and denied access to adequate food, water, basic medical care and 
hygiene (amnesty international 2013b). in august 2013, it was reported that some were 
being held in the tripoli zoo along with animals (westcott and wahhab 2013). 

human rights implications 

the  above  discussion  demonstrates  that  in  situations  of  disaster,  violence  and  conflict, 
a range of fundamental human rights may be implicated. beyond the rights to life and 
security of the person, which may affect both citizens and noncitizens in a similar manner, 
noncitizens may be particularly vulnerable to violations of other fundamental rights. these 
include  the  prohibition  against  discrimination  (for  example,  in  the  provision  of  relief 
services), the prohibition on refoulement (where individuals fleeing persecution or other 
forms of serious harm are restricted from entering neighboring countries), the right to leave 
any country (for example, in contexts where exit permits limit the ability of noncitizens to 
depart a country, or where employers confiscate travel documents) and the right to freedom 
of movement (for example, where mobility restrictions are placed on authorized workers), 
among others. 

part 4: promising practices 
while each of the crises discussed in this paper reveal circumstances in which noncitizens 
vulnerabilities have been exacerbated, the crises also feature actions by various stakeholders 
that have the potential to mitigate such vulnerabilities. these practices provide lessons for 
addressing the protection needs of noncitizens in future humanitarian crises. the following 
section provides a brief review of a handful of examples of these promising practices.

communication systems

communications  mechanisms  that  are  designed  to  operate  at  the  community  level 
are  important  for  relaying  crisis-related  information  and  providing  support  networks, 
particularly  in  situations  of  isolation,  power  shortages,  or  where  noncitizens  access  to 
technology  may  be  limited.  civil  society  in  the  philippines,  for  example,  has  invested 
in  cultivating  support  networks  for  its  citizens  abroad  based  on  the  premise  that  they 

44

journal on migration and human securitythemselves  can  reach  and  assist  one  another  in  crisis  situations. this  initiative,  named 
balabal  (shawl  or  cloak)  was  effective  in  supporting  civil  society  and  the  philippines 
government to assist a group of migrant workers trapped in syria, enabling them to reach 
safety and return home (iom 2011b). similarly, where technology is available, a variety of 
multi-lingual dissemination mechanisms may facilitate more effective communication of 
crisis- and relief-related information to noncitizens, ensuring that those who may not have 
host language proficiency are able to understand important messages. 
both japan and the united states broadcasted emergency information via websites and 
online social networks in multiple languages. the japanese ministry of foreign affairs 
(mofa) assumed a prominent role in supporting noncitizens in at-risk areas of the country 
during the 2011 triple disaster. immediately following the earthquake, a special page on 
the website of the mofa was set up for the purposes of sharing up-to-date information 
in both japanese and english surrounding the crisis and rescue efforts (iom 2011b).  the 
radio  network  was  also  used  to  broadcast  information  in  17  languages.  updates  were 
provided  in  english,  arabic,  bengali,  burmese,  chinese,  french,  hindu,  indonesia, 
korean,  persian,  portuguese,  russian,  spanish,  swahili,  thai,  urdu,  and  vietnamese 
(izumi 2012a; yamamoto 2013). in the united states, the government provides web-based 
information  on  crisis  situations  through  a  comprehensive  and  user-friendly  site  called, 
ready:  prepare,  plan,  stay  informed,  in  12  languages  other  than  english,  including: 
arabic,  chinese,  french,  haitian,  hindi,  japanese,  korean,  russian,  spanish, tagalog, 
urdu and vietnamese.25  

temporary cessation of immigration enforcement activities 

as  noted  earlier,  fear  of  law  enforcement  may  deter  noncitizens  from  coming  forward 
to  seek  relief  assistance  or  inhibit  them  from  moving  out  of  harms  way.  to  address 
this  concern, us  authorities suspended  certain enforcement activities in  anticipation of 
hurricane  sandy.  shortly  before  the  storm  hit,  immigration  and  customs  enforcement 
(ice)  and  customs  and  border  protection  (cbp)  issued  a  joint  statement  in  multiple 
languages confirming that in the event of an officially-ordered evacuation or an emergency 
government  response,  their  highest  priority  would  be  to  promote  safe  evacuation  and 
life-saving assistance while maintaining public order. moreover, the statement reported 
that there would be no immigration enforcement initiatives associated with evacuations 
or sheltering related to sandy, including the use of checkpoints during an evacuation.26 
similarly,  the  united  states  citizenship  and  immigration  services  (uscis)  issued 
a  statement to  alert individuals  affected  by  the  storm  of  temporary immigration relief 
measures and to express understanding that a natural disaster may impede an individuals 
ability to maintain lawful immigration status or obtain certain benefits (uscis 2014).
 in order to ensure that information is disseminated accurately and effectively, civil society 
organizations have an important role to play in reaching immigrant populations who might 
not trust or otherwise be aware of government announcements.

25   see http://www.ready.gov/. 
26   see ice-cbp joint message regarding hurricane sandy, october 2012. http://www.dhs.gov/ice-cbp-
joint-message-regarding-hurricane-sandy. 

45

on the marginscreating channels for re-entry 

some noncitizens will put themselves in high-risk situations and remain in countries that 
are undergoing crises out of fear that they may be unable to return. in japan, the ministry 
of justice and the immigration bureau made it easier for many affected foreigners to obtain 
reentry by swiftly processing visas and return applications, and allowing reentry for those 
whose visas were not valid for renewal (izumi 2012a). additionally, the government eased, 
to some extent, management of certificates of eligibility, a document which verifies that 
a  person  meets  certain conditions  for  immigration (ibid). asylum  seekers  and  refugees 
however, appear not to have benefited from similar privileges (koike 2011).

targeted action to address unique needs that arise during crises
in crisis settings, services that uniquely address challenges faced by noncitizens may mitigate 
vulnerabilities. during the floods in thailand, the ministry of labor created the flood relief 
and assistance center for migrant workers, which provided a number of targeted services, 
including some employment opportunities and assistance with returning to countries of 
origin (boocha-oom and dixon 2012, 10). following the flooding, thailand began to work 
with neighboring countries on bilateral agreements to streamline the legalization process 
for some migrant workers and to create systematic channels for them to return to their 
countries of origin. the government of myanmar also worked with thai officials to open 
recruitment centers and offices for processing documents for migrant workers (hall 2012a, 
2012b). an additional example was seen in the philippines government delegation to syria 
to negotiate the exit of filipino domestic workers stranded there. during the crisis in libya, 
it was reported that the vast majority of the population of 916 sahrawi stateless students 
were evacuated and returned to camps in algeria, courtesy of the algerian government. in 
this instance, it is notable that in the absence of a country of origin for sahrawis, algeria 
assumed responsibility to move these students to safety, as the host country to the largest 
number of sahrawis, who reside across five desert camps in tindouf (hall 2012b, 13).

seeking external assistance 

as the situation in libya deteriorated in early 2011, bangladesh actively sought financial 
and technical assistance for repatriating its citizens to safety. out of an estimated 50,000 
bangladeshi citizens thought to be residing in libya, more than 30,000 had returned home 
with iom assistance by the end of march, while another 6,500 were evacuated in subsequent 
weeks. the repatriation of another 10,000 migrant workers was paid through a $40 million 
world bank loan which bangladesh secured as the crisis unfolded. the majority of the 
loan was allocated to provide livelihood support and reintegration assistance for returnees 
(kelly and wadud 2012).
while the examples of promising practices highlighted above focus primarily on actions 
that could be undertaken before or during crises, the needs of noncitizens may continue to 
persist well after the abatement of the crisis. in such situations, post-crisis interventions that 
address needs and challenges, including outstanding wages, compensation, psychosocial 
trauma,  and  reintegration,  may  become  necessary.  similarly,  tailored  responses  to  the 
protection needs associated with the mobility of noncitizens are critical. 

46

journal on migration and human securityconclusion
with  more  people  than  ever  living  outside  their  home  countries,  new  and  sustained 
eruptions of violence and conflict, and the frequency and intensity of disasters predicted 
to  increase,  noncitizens  will  continue  to  be  caught  in  countries  experiencing  crises. 
this paper has described some factors that influenced the vulnerabilities and protection 
needs  of  noncitizens  caught  in  five  crisis  situations.  it  has  highlighted  specific  groups 
of noncitizens which require targeted action to mitigate vulnerabilities based on distinct 
attributes, identified implications for fundamental human rights, and presented a selection 
of promising practices to address their needs. 
there are limits on the extent to which generalizable lessons may be drawn from the five crises 
and examples provided. nonetheless, the examples suggest that interventions addressing 
three key issues are valuable when undertaking efforts to alleviate challenges noncitizens 
may encounter in accessing assistance and protection during crises, and to mitigate their 
exposure to harm. these interventions apply primarily to countries experiencing a crisis, 
but also to origin countries seeking to assist and protect citizens abroad. they include the 
following:  
1. actions aimed at addressing the underlying legal and policy landscape to minimize the 
vulnerabilities of noncitizens when a crisis occurs. these actions may include: 

  mapping the size, location, demographics and categories of noncitizens in country.
  providing  increased  communication  channels  between  countries  of  origin  and 
noncitizens abroad through mechanisms such as the establishment of designated 
focal points at consulates and/or the creation of trusted social networks among the 
diaspora in countries of destination. 

  ensuring noncitizens are explicitly factored into contingency planning and crisis-

preparedness measures at both national and local levels.

  allocating one (or more) department(s) at the national and local government levels 

to be responsible for the protection of noncitizens in the context of crises. 

  reviewing and reforming laws and policies that could exacerbate the vulnerabilities 
of noncitizens in crisis situations, such as those that place restrictions on freedom of 
movement or impede the ability to leave the country.

2.  actions aimed at ensuring that all categories of noncitizens are able to access, understand 
and navigate information regarding emergency and relief assistance and are able to utilize 
them when a crisis occurs. these actions may include: 

  ensuring emergency and relief messages are communicated in multiple languages 
and  using  a  range  of  modes  that  meet  the  particular  circumstances  of  different 
categories of noncitizens. 

  enlisting  the  support  of  civil  society  and  other  actors  to  assist  noncitizens  in 

accessing services for which they are eligible. 

3. actions  aimed  at  limiting  the  exposure  of  noncitizens  to  harm  when  a  crisis  occurs 
through targeted measures that address their needs and vulnerabilities. these actions may 
include:

47

on the margins  non-discriminatory access to life-saving and emergency relief services.
  prompt accountability for violations of laws by government authorities and agents.
  calling on external actors to provide resources and technical assistance when necessary.
  limiting or suspending immigration enforcement activities in favor of providing life-

saving assistance.

  ensuring  that  lack  of  documentationwhich  may  be  due  to  unauthorized  status, 
confiscation by employers, or loss during the crisisdoes not inhibit access to relief, 
and there are mechanisms in place to provide replacement documentation to facilitate 
travel. 

the state-led migrants in countries in crisis initiative spearheaded by the united states 
and the philippines, with australia, bangladesh, costa rica, ethiopia and the european 
commission (in partnership with the iom, unhcr, isim, and the office of the special 
representative of the un secretary general on international migration) seeks to develop 
non-binding voluntary guidelines with a view to enhancing protection and assistance for 
noncitizens  caught  in  violence,  conflict  and  disaster  (iom  2014b).  the  initiative  is  an 
important step in advancing global governance of crisis migration and addressing gaps for 
at-risk populations. 

