weeping in the playtime of others: 
the obama administrations 
failed reform of ice family 
detention practices

dora schriro1 

executive summary
the  united  states  has  long  struggled  with  the  practice  of  detaining 
immigrant families and over time, most reform efforts have flagged, if not 
failed. this paper examines the impact of the illegal immigration reform 
and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 (iirira) through an exploration 
of  the  evolution  of  the  family  residential  center  (frc)  for  families  in 
immigration  custody,  established  prior  to  the  9/11  terrorist  attack  by 
the  immigration  and  naturalization  service  (ins),  and  expanded  by 
immigration and customs enforcement (ice) in its aftermath. the paper 
provides an inside look at how policymakers, at various points in the obama 
administration, sought to roll back its most infirm practices and the fate 
of those efforts. it begins with a brief history of family detention in the 
united states, continues with a summary of the reforms undertaken both 
early and late in the obama administration, and examines the significant 
challenges it faced and the less progressive positions it adopted during its 
first and second terms in office. 
the paper concludes with a discussion of reasons for the rapid reversal 
of its previous reforms and provides recommendations to achieve a civil, 
civil  system  of  immigration  enforcement  for  families  and  all  others, 
which  means  nothing  less  than  the  transformation  of  the  immigrant 
detention system from a criminal to a civil paradigm, consistent with the 
population  and  legal  authorities.2  the  need  for  such an  effort  is  all  the 
more urgent in light of executive actions taken in the early days of the 
trump administration and their initial outcomes. among those thwarting 
admissions are orders to customs and border protection (cbp) and us 

1   dora schriro served as senior advisor to us department of homeland security (dhs) secretary janet 
napolitano and then as us immigration and customs enforcements (ice) first director of the office of 
detention policy and planning (odpp) at the beginning of president obamas first term. during the latter 
part of the administrations second term, secretary jeh johnson formed the dhs advisory committee on 
family residential facility (acfrc) and selected her as a subject matter expert in detention to serve as a 
member. schriro has also served as a commissioner on both the american bar associations commission on 
immigration and the womens refugee commission.
2   for further discussion of the concept of a civil, civil system of immigration enforcement, see schriro 
(2009).

 2017 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 5 number 2 (2017): 452-480citizenship  and  immigration  services  (uscis)  to  seal  the  us  borders, 
shun  refugees  fleeing  from  war-torn  regions  until  extreme  vetting 
measures are put into place, and reassess others who have already been 
issued visas. additional orders issued to ice expanded and expedited the 
removal of persons whose conduct could result in charges or convictions as 
well as those with criminal charges or convictions, resulting in a 38 percent 
increase in arrests by ice agents within the first 100 days of the trump 
administration (dickerson 2017b; duara 2017).

do ye hear the children weeping, o my brothers, 
ere the sorrow comes with years? 
they are leaning their young heads against their mothers, 
and that cannot stop their tears. 
the young lambs are bleating in the meadows, 
the young birds are chirping in the nest, 
the young fawns are playing with the shadows, 
the young flowers are blowing toward the west -
but the young, young children, o my brothers, 
they are weeping bitterly! 
they are weeping in the playtime of the others, 
in the country of the free.3

a brief history of family detention

the first family detention facilities

our nations history is imperfect, our views of new and recent arrivals are peppered with 
prejudice, and our commitment to inalienable rights is conditional. a part of our past, and 
present, is both the governments displacement of families and its incapacitation of families 
outside  the  criminal  process.  us  history  includes  the  internment  of  native  american 
families4 and the detention of immigrant families from europe on ellis and angel islands 
(see npr 2010; pbs, n.d.). it incorporates the displacement of asian and other families of 
us citizens and immigrants during world wars i and ii (pbs 2015; gonzalez 2015), and 
the detention of cuban and haitian families in florida and at guantnamo bay (dastyari 
and effeney 2012). 
more recent family detention practices occurred in the 1980s when the numbers of refugees 
from cuba, haiti, and central america, among them unaccompanied and accompanied 

3   the cry of the children by elizabeth barrett browning is a poem about children workers, published in 
blackwoods edinburgh magazine in 1842. kenneth wooten used the next to last line in the first of 13 stanzas 
as the title of his book, weeping in the playtime of others: americas incarcerated children, published by 
ohio university press in 1976.
4   the government interned native american families in military forts during the removal of 183839. their 
experience is also relevant to the immigrant experience because the united states did not recognize many 
native americans as citizens until the 1924 indian citizenship act (see loc, n.d.).

453

weeping in the playtime of otherschildren, dramatically increased. initially, the government responded by releasing children 
to a parent or legal guardian and then holding any remaining children in border detention 
facilities and tent shelters (olivas 1990). for a time, it also housed entire families of central 
american migrants in large american red cross camps along the texas-mexico border 
(bolton 1994; lodi news-sentinel 1989). 
in 1996, congress passed both the antiterrorism and effective death penalty act and the 
illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act,5 markedly changing us 
immigration law. among the amendments adversely affecting families were the creation 
of an expedited removal process and the significant expansion of categories of persons 
subject to mandatory detention. in march 2001, ins, the precursor to the us department 
of  homeland  security  (dhs),  converted  a  county  nursing  home  in  berks  county, 
pennsylvania,  into  the  berks  county  family  residential  center  (berks),  the  nations 
first modern facility to temporarily detain migrant families undergoing administrative 
immigration proceedings or who were otherwise subject to mandatory detention (bfrc 
2009). berks county owns the then 84-bed facility and operated it for the ins initially, and 
for ice subsequently, pursuant to a contract. 
for a time, berks was the governments only detention center for families with under-
aged children (families).6 the facility was secure but smaller and the grounds greener than 
the family residential centers (frc) that followed and its programs were generally more 
progressive than were those at adult detention centers. still, ice routinely separated older 
children from their parents and assigned them to rooms with non-familial adults of the 
same sex. until recently, it was the only licensed frc; now, none of the three currently in 
operation are licensed.7 in early 2016, the pennsylvania department of human services 
berks revoked berks license. 
in 1997, the flores v. meese lawsuit, concerning the rights of unaccompanied children in 
immigration custody, resulted in a stipulated settlement agreement (flores agreement) 
setting out nationwide policy.8 the flores agreement addressed the childrens placement 
in the least restrictive setting  indeed, a licensed, non-secure facility  only when 
necessary, and then for no more than several days,9 in order to make an informed determination 
of removal or relief to protect their rights and ensure their well-being (see doj 2001). 

5   anti-terrorism and effective death penalty act of 1996, pub. l. no. 104-132, 110 stat. 1214 (1996); 
illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996, pub. l. no. 104-208, 110 stat. 3009-
546 (1996).
6   since its opening through spring 2016, berks accepted fathers as well as mothers and their children. ice 
has always restricted the use of karnes and dilley (as well as artesia before it closed) to mothers and their 
children. it separated the majority of fathers from their children, assigning most of them instead to a detention 
facility for single, adult males and releasing the remainder. 
7    the  states,  not  the  us  government,  licenses  facilities  operating  within  their  jurisdictions.  licensing 
practices vary widely by state; there is no one set of minimum expectations to which all states adhere. 
8   stipulated settlement agreement, flores v. meese, no. cv 85-4544-rjk (px) (c.d. cal. 17 january 1997). 
for cases culminating in the settlement agreement, see flores v. meese, no. 85-4544- rjk(px)(cd cal. 30 
november 1987); flores v. meese, no. 85-4544-rjk(px) (cd cal. 25 may 1988); flores v. meese, 934 f.2d 
991 (1990); flores v. meese, 942 f.2d 1352 (1992); and reno v. flores, 507 u.s. 292 (1993).
9   the agreement stipulated release would occur within three days, if the minor was apprehended in an 
ins district in which a licensed program is located and had space available; and otherwise within five days 
pursuant to paragraph 19 (ibid.). 

454

journal on migration and human securityunder  the  flores agreement,  the  government  would  release  unaccompanied  minors  to 
the care of their parents or other family members whenever possible; otherwise, it would 
place them in foster homes or licensed facilities providing age-appropriate programs. in 
2002, congress transferred the care of unaccompanied minors as prescribed in the flores 
agreement10 legislatively to the us department of health and human services (dhhs), 
office of refugee resettlement (orr).11 the custody of families continues to be ices 
responsibility. 

detention policy changes after 9/11

in the aftermath of the september 11, 2001 terrorist attacks (9/11), the government fortified 
immigration law enforcement, resulting in further changes to family detention policies. 
congress passed the homeland security act12 in 2002, creating the dhs, absorbing ins 
and subdividing it into three new agencies within dhs: ice, uscis, and cbp.13 soon 
afterwards, the expedited removal process was expanded to encompass some asylum seekers 
and other migrants crossing us land borders (dhs 2004), which resulted in detention, the 
preferred management strategy, and disproportionately affected families. the us largely 
abandoned its pre-9/11 policies of either releasing families or detaining them in family 
units and, instead, separated parents from their children and one another, detaining the 
adults and sending the children including infants and toddlers, to facilities operated by 
orr. the involuntary separation of parents from their children had the effect of rendering 
the children unaccompanied for legal purposes (see wrc and lirs 2007; lirs 2014).
congress took notice. in 2005, the house appropriations committee directed dhs to stop 
separating families: the committee expects dhs to release families or use alternatives 
to  detention  such  as  the  intensive  supervised appearance  program  whenever  possible. 
when detention of family units is necessary, the committee directs dhs to use appropriate 
detention space to house them together.14 

the berks and hutto family residential centers

dhs did not release more families or increase its use of alternatives to detention; instead, 
it expanded secure capacity to detain more families. in may 2006, ice opened a second 
and larger facility, the 512-bed t. don hutto family residential center (hutto) in taylor, 
texas,15 to detain mothers and their children. neither its physical plant and programs nor 
its policies and practices were age-appropriate or family-friendly. the cinderblock facility 
had no windows, the corridors were long, and metal bars on windows and solid steel doors 

10   see footnote 8. 
11   the homeland security act (hsa) of 2002,  462, pub. l. 107296, 116 stat. 2135, was enacted on 25 
november 2002 (codified as amended at 6 u.s.c.  101-613 (2011)).
12   homeland security act, pub. l. 107296, 116 stat. 2135 (2002). 
13   ice is responsible for immigration enforcement. uscis handles all matters pertaining to immigration 
benefits and the granting of citizenship to non-nationals. cbp secures the borders whereas the us coast 
guard patrols and protects the coastline (see https://www.dhs.gov/).
14   h.r. rep. 109-79, at 38 (2005). 
15   ice operates hutto under an intergovernmental service agreement with williamson co., texas, which 
contracts with corrections corporation of america for the facilitys day-to-day operations (ice 2011).

455

weeping in the playtime of othersstill remained in place from the time that the facility housed adult male sheriffs prisoners. 
movement within the facility and access to the grounds were severely restricted and age-
appropriate  programs  were  negligible.  there  were  reoccurring  reports  of  questionable 
medical and mental health care resulting in weight loss, depression, and other documented 
conditions.16 
congress  soon  concluded  that  hutto,  a  former  medium  security  prison  for  adult  male 
inmates, still operated as an adult correctional facility, and criticized both berks and hutto, 
noting that although berks was more homelike than hutto, it also failed to afford children 
the least restrictive setting, as required per the flores agreement.17 
in march 2007, the american civil liberties union (aclu) and others challenged ices 
enforcement  practices,  arguing  that  using  hutto  to  detain  families  violated  the  rights 
of the detained minors. the lawsuit charged that ice impermissibly separated children 
from their parents, detained them illegally, and treated them as prisoners, contrary to the 
flores agreement.18  plaintiffs  also  asserted  ices  actions  violated  congresss  repeated 
instructions to dhs to: (1) keep families together whenever possible; (2) release families 
together whenever possible; (3) employ the least restrictive alternatives to detention; and (4) 
when detention was necessary, place families in normalized settings. in august 2007, ice 
entered into a settlement agreement with the plaintiffs,19 concurring in part to: use hutto as 
a placement of last resort; improve the physical plant and its policies and procedures so it 
was less prison-like; professionalize the workforce; routinely review detained individuals 
eligibility  for  reassignment  to  less  restrictive  settings;  and  adopt  transparent  operating 
standards. 
late in 2007, ice promulgated family residential standards for the operation of berks and 
hutto (see ice, n.d.) its stated purpose was to set minimum expectations for those facilities 
safety and security, staff selection and training, program services, and medical care. in 
fact, ice used standards created by the american correctional association (aca) to guide 
jailors. the aca premised its standards upon adult corrections case law specific to pre-trial 
adult defendants. ice did not recognize the standards for what they were or intended to do 
and kept them largely intact after a limited window for public comment closed. as such, it 
afforded families only a few personal possessions, restricted their movement in the facility 
and on the grounds, and curtailed their access to counsel. the standards were also advisory, 
with limited provision for sanctions and only a few penalties for non-compliance in place. 
ice delegated to others the monitoring of the facilities for compliance with the standards.20 
amongst  the  limited  and  ill-advised  instruction  it  provided,  ice  directed  the  monitors 
to announce their inspections in advance and to conduct their tours only during business 
hours. even under these favorable conditions, frc operators and ice administrators alike 
often argued for the adjustment of the monitors final scores before they released them, and 

16   compl. for declaratory and injunctive relief, in re hutto family detention ctr., no. 07-cv-164-ss (w.d. 
tex. 6 march 2007), ecf no. 1.
17   h.r. rep. 109-476, at 43 (2006).
18   compl. for declaratory and injunctive relief at 2-4, in re hutto family detention ctr., no. 07-cv-164-ss.
19   settlement agreement, in re hutto family detention ctr., (26 august 2007), ecf no. 92-1.
20   ice entered into agreements with the counties of berks, pennsylvania, and williamson, texas, for both 
facilities. berks county operated its facility for ice whereas williamson county contracted with the private 
sector. ice also contracted with the private sector to ascertain both facilities compliance with frc standards. 

456

journal on migration and human securitytypically senior managers at headquarters capitulated. without checks and balances and 
with only negligible consequences in place, berks and hutto usually received favorable 
reviews. in those infrequent instances that a monitor documented a deficiency, ice rarely 
imposed penalties or cancelled a contract. 

reforms to detention policy and practice in 2009

early in 2009, shortly after president obama took office, dhs undertook a comprehensive 
assessment of detention policy and practice, with the goals of reducing reliance on detention 
and improving the efficiency and effectiveness of ice. dhs secretary napolitano appointed 
me to the newly established position of special advisor on ice to focus on the significant 
growth in immigration detention and ice arrest priorities (dhs 2009). i commenced a 
national study including the inspection of more than 25 of the most problematic facilities 
and immediately began making changes. among the first steps taken, ice removed all of 
the families at hutto (bernstein 2009). as many families as possible were released; the rest 
were transferred to berks. in september 2009, after ice removed the last of the families 
 lowering the total number of frc beds from 384 to its original capacity of 84  it re-
commissioned hutto as an all-female, adult-only facility.
i also wrote a report about the system-wide assessment of the countrys detention practices, 
released by dhs in october 2009 (schriro 2009). the report included recommendations 
that laid the groundwork for a number of reforms that dhs announced around the time of 
its release to improve conditions for all detained individuals including special populations 
 notably women, families, and asylum seekers  and to expand appreciably community-
based alternatives to detention. other recommendations realized during this time included 
the detainee locator database, death-in-detention notifications, an objective risk assessment 
instrument normed specifically for the ice population, and assigned, independent on-site 
contract monitors. 
among the reports findings, none was more important than this: in federal fiscal year (ffy) 
2008, ice operated the largest detention and community-release programs in the country  
larger than the us federal bureau of prisons or any of the biggest states correctional systems 
 with 378,582 migrants from 221 countries in its custody or under its supervision during 
the year. it was also the most ill-equipped of any agency to assume these responsibilities. 
ice consisted primarily of law enforcement personnel whose orientation and expertise 
centered  on  enforcing  immigration  law  but  not  in  the  execution  of  detention  activities 
and community-based alternatives. the agency lacked the organizational infrastructure, 
the will and the way, needed to execute this critical component of its mission (schriro 
2009). the widespread lack of interest and expertise in matters other than enforcement, 
coupled with policy shifts towards increased reliance upon detention, consistent with the 
workforces disdain for the population and its preference for punitive practices, accelerated 
and exacerbated ices reliance on contractors.21 inside the administration, the champions 
for change diminished in number and soon redirected to other pressing issues of the day. 
today, ice is still the nations largest system of incapacitation with 783,454 migrants from 
21   one of the few changes that ice initiated after the release of the report was to change the name of the unit 
that performed ices detention activities from detention and removal operations (dro) to enforcement 
and removal operations (ero), reasserting its view of its core mission.

457

weeping in the playtime of others178 countries in its custody or under its supervision annually (acfrc 2016, 25), and it is 
no more adept now than when dhs released the report. during its last year in office, ice 
deported 240,255 immigrants.22 between the administrations first year in office and its last, 
ice increased its capacity to detain families from 84 beds in 2009 to 3,750 beds in 2016.
the report identified several significant steps that the administration could take to transform 
ice from a substantively penal to a civil system. one, it argued that ice should premise 
decision making upon the likelihood of eligibility for relief and a presumption of release 
to the community as the rule rather than the exception. two, ice should establish clear 
standards of care based upon community standards and civil case law, and not penal practices. 
three, it should put an organizational infrastructure in place with the requisite management 
tools  and  informational  systems  that  included  objective  assessment  instruments  and 
classification tools to continuously inform and align care, custody restrictions, programs, 
privileges, and delivery of services consistent with individually assessed risk and need. 
four, it must ensure meaningful access to legal materials and counsel, to a viable grievance 
mechanism, as well as to visitation, religious practice, and translation services. five, it 
must establish a health care system comparable to other government-funded programs and 
extend its coverage through release to the community or removal from the united states. 
six and last, it must implement a system of rigorous and independent oversight by expert 
federal officials to monitor conditions for compliance, to timely publish objective findings, 
to take remedial steps, and to impose proportionate sanctions for non-compliance. 
in short, the report urged ice to put in place an informed plan of action to improve decision 
making, activities, and outcomes. adoption would commit the agency to full transparency, 
to increase its accountability to others and most fundamentally, to comply with the law.23 
dhs adopted the report in its entirety and published it on its website where it remained 
throughout the obama administration. ice agreed to temper its use of detention and it 
imposed excessive supervision requirements on those released to the community. for a 
time, the momentum was palpable. ice put a number of plans into place to lower cost and 
yield better results, among them establishing the office of detention policy and planning 
(odpp) within ice to oversee the implementation of the remaining recommendations in the 
2009 report.24 odpp took substantive steps to enhance oversight and improve accountability 
during the first year of the first term but overall, reform of the system faltered. it was not 
among the administrations top priorities and countervailing enforcement policies quickly 
overtook this initiative.

the road to hell was paved with good intentions 

most fundamentally, dhss core mission is emergency preparedness and preparation for 
all manner of incursions, both natural and manufactured, foreign and domestic. specific 
to  immigration,  adoption  of  this  posture  would  ensure  that  in  the  event  of  an  increase 
22   during 2016, the last year of the obama administration, immigration deportation rose another 2 percent 
(jordan 2016). 
23   in 2001, the us supreme court held the government could not hold civil detained individuals indefinitely 
and that detention is permissible only to facilitate deportation (see zadvydas v. davis, 533 u.s. 678 [2001]). 
in 2015, a district court ruled that detention cannot be used to deter mass migrations (see footnotes 29 and 
30).
24   see footnote 2.

458

journal on migration and human securityin arriving asylum seekers, for example, the government would be ready to respond  
lawfully, efficiently, and effectively. despite dhs best intentions in 2009 to make civil 
detention more civil for families and others in its custody, ice failed to take many of the 
needed steps to that end. specific to immigration detention, appropriate action would have 
entailed ensuring that the family residential facilities comply with the flores agreement 
that ins reached in 1997 and in which ice is still embroiled, and ensuring that families 
are detained only when absolutely necessary, for the briefest time necessary and then, only 
in non-secure, family-friendly, licensed child care facilities.25 instead, ice continues to 
defend the egregious practices that caused so much difficulty for ins, among them using 
unlicensed and secure facilities, the very antitheses to the principles, policies, and practices 
that dhs embraced in the flores agreement. lacking all manner of strategic thinking and 
age-appropriate responses, the likelihood that an enforcement agency would continue to 
default to enforcement strategies in an emergency was great. similarly, the governments 
repeated failure to make good faith and sustained efforts to comply with that agreement, 
ultimately limited its options to successfully manage the humanitarian crisis that was about 
to unfold.  

the influx in migrant families at the southwestern us border in 

the summer of 2014
the arrival of families and children seeking the protection of the us government along the 
southwest us border from central america in the summer of 2014 triggered an immediate 
and severe response by the administration (preston and randal 2014). unlawful crossings 
at the border were at an historic low, but the increased number of children and families 
presented  unique  challenges.  the  women  and  children  were  fleeing  highly  organized, 
transnational gang activity and various forms of violence and extreme poverty in honduras, 
guatemala, and el salvador (also known as the northern triangle) and they were seeking 
safety, protection, and family reunification in the united states.26 thousands of families, 
mostly  children  and  their  mothers,  traveled  north  from  central america,  fleeing  gang 
murders and pervasive violence, to the southwest border of the united states in search of 
protection.27 in ffy 2014, cbp apprehended 68,445 parents and children traveling together 
at the us-mexico border (cbp, n.d.). 
25   see footnote 8. 
26   for the first time since record keeping began in 1992, fewer than half were migrating from mexico (see 
cbp, n.d.; castillo 2014). 
27   under us law, most families could apply for protection in the form of asylum while others would qualify 
only  to  apply  for  a  related  form  of  relief  known  as  withholding  of  removal  (see  ina    208,  241[b]
[3][b]). in either case, the applicant for relief must meet the international law definition of refugee to 
receive legal recognition of their need for protection and the right to remain in the united states indefinitely 
(see ina  101[a][42][a], 208[b][1], 241[b][3][b]). the international refugee definition is set forth in the 
un convention relating to the status of refugees (geneva, jul. 28, 1951) 189 u.n.t.s. 150, extended by 
the protocol relating to the status of refugees, (new york, jan. 31, 1967) 19 u.s.t. 6223, 606 u.n.t.s. 
267, and in effect for the united states on november 1, 1968, through accession to the refugee protocol. 
refugee status requires a showing of persecution because of race, religion, nationality, political opinion, 
or membership in a particular social group. additionally, some of the children and/or their parents may also 
qualify for other forms of relief such as u visas for victims of certain crimes committed in the united states 
and special immigrant juvenile status for children who have been abandoned, abused or neglected by a 
parent (see ina  101[a][15][u], 101[a][27][j)]).

459

weeping in the playtime of otherscharacterizing this humanitarian situation as a threat to national security, the administration 
responded with a statement from dhs secretary johnson, who emphasized the need for 
marked increases in detention and deportation in order to send a message to deter future 
migration (dhs 2014).

reasons  for  the  increase  in  migrants  from  central  america  in 

summer 2014 
it was primarily increased transnational criminal organization activity,28 violence from other 
sources, extreme poverty, and the desire for family reunification that led to the increase 
in border crossings by mothers with their children and by unaccompanied minors from 
the northern triangle in 2014 (kennedy 2014). violence seemed to be the single greatest 
motivation, even when considering all of the other factors (aic 2014). in interviews with 
unaccompanied children, boys and girls alike cited crime, gang threats, and violence as 
reasons for leaving home (kenney 2014).29 children and adolescents were particularly at 
risk of transnational gangs attention, with boys targeted for involuntary recruitment and 
girls to service its members (unhcr 2014). mothers and their children also fled domestic 
and gender-based persecution, both common in the northern triangle, and often linked to 
gang and societal violence (equiziba et al. 2015).30 
the number of mothers and children arriving from the northern triangle countries slowed 
by late fall 2015, then began to rise again. a public relations campaign in central america 
funded by the us government intended to deter immigration, and us training and assistance 
intended to increase deportations by mexico (wola 2015; ortega 2015) made it more 
difficult for families to reach the us border. through it all, dhs continued to expand its 
family detention capacity by, first, repurposing a federal training barrack in artesia, new 
mexico, as the artesia frc (artesia), and shortly afterwards by closing the controversial 
facility; by converting karnes, an adult male detention center to the karnes frc (karnes); 
by enlarging both dilley and berks frcs; and by hardening community release. during 
the first four months of ffy 2016, cbp apprehended 24,616 central american families 
at the us-mexico border, a significant drop from ffy 2014. when ice released families 
from detention, it increasingly conditioned release upon electronic supervision (pri 2016). 

 
28    frequently  referred  to  as  gangs,  they  are,  in  fact,  transnational  criminal  organizations    highly 
organized,  powerful,  transnational  entities  with  complex  hierarchies  at  a  cellular  level  operating  across 
borders.
29   notably, there was no significant pattern of arrivals to the united states of families from nicaragua, 
which had not experienced the same level of violence as the countries of the northern triangle, despite its 
geographic proximity to honduras, guatemala, and el salvador and even higher levels of poverty (see cbp 
2012; economist 2012). 
30   in guatemala, the second most common category of crime was violence against women. abuse and 
femicide, defined as murder for gender-related motives, were most often the result of misogyny, a part of 
gang rituals, and within intimate relationships. homicide rates in the northern triangle are among the highest 
in the world, with guatemala, el salvador, and honduras consistently reporting three of the five highest 
national murder rates. 

460

journal on migration and human securitythe obama administrations response 
the obama administration was conflicted and its response was confusing. in the summer 
of  2014,  it  designated  the  federal  emergency  management agency  (fema),  another 
agency of dhs, to organize and coordinate a federal response to the increase in arrivals 
of unaccompanied children and families at the us-mexico border (white house 2014a), 
many of whom appeared to be eligible for asylum and related protections under us law. 
even as it struggled to address the rapidly unfolding humanitarian crisis, the white house 
was responding to calls to stop unlawful migration with enhanced enforcement measures. 
president obama asked congress for approximately $4 billion in emergency funds (rogers 
2014), intending to use some of it to increase the capacity of the immigration courts to 
adjudicate  more  claims  faster  and  the  rest,  to  expand  ices  detention  and  supervision 
capacities (white house 2014b). although the administration did not receive these monies, 
it still increased the detention of families of central american asylum seekers. however, it 
did not request, nor did congress allocate, funds for legal counsel for minors or additional 
immigration judges to handle the influx. instead, vice president biden sought to engage 
the legal community in discussions about its obligation to respond to the immigration crisis 
along the border, urging them to increase their collective efforts to provide counsel to the 
population.

changes at berks

ice relocated berks to a larger building on the grounds of the county compound in 2012 
and  raised  the  capacity  from  84  to  96  secure  beds.  in  2014,  when  the  administration 
changed its detention policy, remanding more families and holding them longer, berks 
 the only frc at the time  filled up quickly. whereas ice had only detained families 
briefly up to that point, time in detention rose precipitously. longer stays resulted in a need 
for more beds; the third floor of the building was renovated, doubling its capacity (orozco 
and turner 2015; hrf 2015a). just about that time, the state of pennsylvania revisited 
the countys authority to license the facility as a family residential center and determined 
it could only be licensed to house children, and not children with their parents, under state 
law. the county appealed and the state responded. the state permitted berks to continue 
to operate during the pendency of the process, but prohibited any use of the recently added 
beds.31 at the time of publication, the appeal was still pending. 

the opening and closing of artesia

late in june 2014, ice opened the artesia family residential center (artesia) in artesia, 
new mexico. located in the states far southeastern corner, ice repurposed a cbp training 
barracks to function as a secure facility with a capacity of 672 beds, for mothers and their 
children. appreciably larger than either berks or hutto and every bit as ill-suited, ice 
added artesia  with  the  goal  of  quickly  moving  central american  families  through  the 
removal process to expedite their deportation (burnett 2014; lorca 2014). 

31   the pennsylvania department of human services gave berks county until february 21, 2016, to operate 
as a child residential facility, a charge exceeding the scope of its statutory mandate (see juntos, n.d.). 

461

weeping in the playtime of othersartesia attracted an onslaught of criticism (redmon 2014; dwn 2014). amongst its many 
problems, there were no immigration lawyers in the community and none nearby when it 
opened. when counsel did arrive, ice impeded their access to the population by practices 
that appeared to affirm a growing concern that the policies and practices it had put in place 
accelerated the deportation of families, without regard to their eligibility for asylum. the 
passage rate for credible fear screening interviews was significantly below the national 
average (see uscis 2014; ice, n.d.) and bond amounts were set five times above the 
national average (lorca 2014). 
within months, amidst increasing negative publicity about significant due process delays 
and concerns about conditions of confinement, ice closed artesia in mid-december 2014 
(manning 2014). ice insisted that the facility had been opened on a temporary basis and, 
with fewer families entering the country; it was time to transition to less isolated and better-
designed facilities (redmon 2014). ice reassigned any of the families remaining at artesia 
at the time of its closure to karnes and dilley (mccabe 2014).

the conversion of karnes adult detention center to a family facility and 

its expansion
at the beginning of august 2014, ice repurposed a county-owned secure facility in karnes 
city, texas, that it had been using to detain adult males in immigration proceedings, largely 
asylum seekers, to hold mothers and their children (ice 2012, 2014). in both iterations, ice 
contracted with the karnes county commission (commission), which in turn contracted 
with the geo group, inc., the countrys second largest private prison corporation. ice 
changed the name of the facility from the karnes civil detention center to the karnes 
family residential center (karnes), but little else changed. it continues to operate on a 
rigid schedule with set times for meals and lights on and out, frequent head counts and 
room  checks  throughout  the  day  and  night,  and  its  guards  are  ill-equipped  to  interact 
appropriately with mothers and children, many of whom are trauma survivors, seeking 
asylum.32 
initially, karnes capacity was 532 mothers and children (ice 2012). in december 2014, 
after a contentious debate, the commission approved a 626-bed expansion, increasing its 
capacity to 1,158, ices largest frc to date. when the work was completed late in 2015 
(geo group 2014), it was still a secure facility and it still was not licensed by the state for 
families (waslin 2016).

the development of dilley

in december 2014, dhs opened its third, and even larger, secure facility to replace artesia 
(ice 2014)  the south texas family residential center (dilley) in dilley, texas, with 
a capacity for 2,400 women and children. in its announcement, dhs stated dilley would 
provide  invaluable  surge  capacity  should  apprehensions  of  adults  with  children  once 
again rise. the corrections corporation of america, the countrys largest for-profit prison 

32   memorandum in support of motion to enforce settlement of class action at 14, flores v. johnson, case 
no. 2:85-cv-04544-rjk (c.d. cal. 2 february 2015).

462

journal on migration and human securitycorporation, owns and operates dilley (waslin 2016). as is the case with the other frcs, 
dilley is not licensed to detain families (see cca, n.d.; hrf 2015b). 

the  impact  of  the  deterrence  rationale  on  family  detention 

policies 
in june 2014, the administration announced that it would pursue wide-scale detention of 
mothers and children to deter other families from seeking asylum in the united states. 
dhs secretary johnson told congress, our message is clear to those who try to illegally 
cross our borders: you will be sent back home. underscoring the departments resolve, he 
added that the government was building additional space to detain these groups and hold 
them until their expedited removal orders are effectuated (dhs 2014b). it was, he said, 
. . . [a]n aggressive deterrence strategy focused on the removal and repatriation of recent 
border crossers.33 immediately thereafter, when ice agents apprehended families at the 
border, they assigned them to a frc for expedited processing.34
in keeping with this rationale, dhs insisted on continued detention during proceedings after 
families received a favorable decision following the credible fear screening interviews. 
between june 2014 and february 2015, ice denied release to nearly all detained families 
in its initial custody determination, even those who had passed their screening interviews.35 
when  families  sought  reviews  of  decisions  to  continue  detention  before  immigration 
judges, ice attorneys opposed release, arguing that a no bond or high bond policy was 
necessary to significantly reduce the unlawful mass migration of guatemalans, hondurans 
and salvadorans.36 notwithstanding ices position, when families were able to secure 
counsel and proceed to a full bond hearing in court, the judges often ordered that bond be 
set at a level enabling families to achieve release. ices policy of detaining for deterrence 
achieved one of its intended results  imposition of lengthy delays for families, even after 
they had established viable asylum claims. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
33   declarations of high-ranking immigration officials filed in court proceedings affirmed that it implemented 
no bond or high bond policies to reduce the migration of guatemalans, hondurans, and salvadorans to 
the united states (see dhs 2014c). 
34   only in the summer of 2015 did the government begin to place some detained families immediately into 
full-fledged proceedings before the immigration courts, rather than placing them into expedited removal. 
these proceedings are termed expedited removal under the immigration and nationality act (ina) section 
235 and reinstatement of removal under ina section 241 for individuals with prior deportation orders.
35   r.i.l-r v. johnson, no. 1:15-cv-00011, 2015 u.s. dist. lexis 20441, at *1112 (d.d.c., 20 february 
2015).
36   see immigration court declaration of philip t. miller, ice assistant director of field operations for 
enforcement and removal operations (miller decl.) at  9 (7 august 2014), http://www.aila.org/ content /
default.aspx?docid=49910; immigration court declaration of traci a. lembke, ice assistant director over 
investigation programs for hsi and ice (lembke decl.) at  20 (7 august 2014) (stating [i]mplementing 
a no bond or high bond policy would help. . . by deterring further mass migration.). 

463

weeping in the playtime of othersin december 2014, advocates brought class-action litigation challenging dhs categorical 
detention of asylum-seeking families to deter future migrants.37 in february 2015, a federal 
district court issued a preliminary injunction prohibiting dhs from using deterrence as 
a  rationale  for  detaining  families  or  as  a  factor  in  custody  determinations.38  the  court 
emphatically  reaffirmed  the  premise  that  immigration  detention  is  civil  in  nature  and 
as  such,  it  must  be  justified  by  a  legitimate  government  interest  and  not  as  a  form  of 
punishment. it held that depriving a family of liberty to deter another potential migrant, 
was an impermissible use of detention, and further, that deterrence was unlikely to mitigate 
any national security threat. 
in may 2015, dhs acquiesced, agreeing to individualize custody determination decisions, 
but still asserting it had the legal authority to detain for deterrence purposes (ice 2015). 
to that end, dhs also announced another process, new in name only, to . . . further focus 
immigration enforcement resources on high priority cases, top among them, families who 
were not part of recent border crossings. 
in august 2015, a federal district court held all minors in custody are protected individuals, 
whether or not accompanied by a parent, and have a right to release.39 the court ordered 
dhs to release accompanying mothers to secure the rights of their children to be free from 
detention; prohibited the use of secure facilities; and required any non-secure facility used 
by ice to be licensed.40 dhs petitioned the court to reconsider its decision but within a 
month, the court ordered the agency to implement these remedies forthwith.41 ice released 
some families on bond but also expedited the removal of others, many of whom had sought 
asylum prior to the exhaustion of their appeals. ice also pursued, unsuccessfully, licensure 
for berks, dilley, and karnes under the infirm assertion that they are non-secure facilities.42 
in sum, dhs continued to pursue the narrowest aims of the court orders, detaining as many 
families as possible under conditions that had not materially improved. 

the final months of the obama presidency: dhs advisory committee on 

family residential centers
in  june  2015,  secretary  johnson  announced  the  formation  of  the advisory  committee 
on family residential centers (acfrc). he explained, (ice) director saldana and i 
understand the sensitive and unique nature of detaining families, and we are committed 

37   see dhs (2014d) stating that the repurposing of karnes to house families was part of dhs sustained 
and aggressive campaign to stem the tide of illegal migration from central america; and ice (2014c) stating 
that dilley was part of a policy aimed at deterring others from taking the dangerous journey and illegally 
crossing into the united states); first amended complaint for injunctive and declaratory relief at p5, 
r.i.l-r v, johnson, no. 1:15-cv-0001 (d.d.c 6 january 2015), https://www.aclu.org/cases/rilr-v-johnson.
38   see r.i.l-r v. johnson, no. 1:15-cv-00011, 2015 u.s. dist. lexis 20441 (d.d.c. 20 february 2015).
39   the august ruling was the result of a july 2015 order to show cause, to which the government responded 
and asked the court to reconsider their decision, which the court deemed improper. 
40   notice of motion and motion to enforce settlement of class action, case no.cv 85-4544-rjk (px) (2 
february 2015). in chambers  order re plaintiffs motion to enforce settlement of class action and 
defendants motion to amend settlement agreement [100, 120], cv 85-4544 dmg (agrx) (24 july 2015). 
41   no later than october 23, 2015.
42   a non-secure facility is one in which detained individuals move without restriction indoors and outside. 
a secure facility is one where policy and practice regulates their movement (lirs 2014). 

464

journal on migration and human securityto continually evaluating it. we have concluded that we must make substantial changes 
to our detention practices when it comes to families (dhs 2015). its mandate was to 
provide  advice  and  recommendations  on  matters  concerning  ices  family  residential 
centers including detention management and reform.43 the venue for providing the advice 
and recommendations was a report due october 2016.44 
dhs  selected  14  subject  matter  experts  (sme)  with  expertise  in  primary  education, 
immigration law, physical and mental health, trauma-informed services, family and youth 
services, detention management, and detention reform, to serve on the committee. i was 
among the 14 committee members and over the next year, co-chaired one of the three 
subcommittees. between october 2015 and october 2016, the acfrc met three times 
in person, and following our tasking in march 2016, usually once a week by phone. with 
just six months to produce a report of consequence, communication among subcommittee 
members and across the subcommittees was critical but curtailed. ice policy required all 
discussion be on the record, precluding ex parte communication amongst the members. as 
a result, ice scheduled the calls at times when designated ice personnel were available 
to participate, and permitted email exchanges among committee members when the phone 
calls were insufficient if they also copied ice personnel. the committee encountered other 
and  more  formidable  obstacles  to  the  realization  of  its  charge.  of  great  consternation, 
initially  ice  narrowed  the  committees  charge,  prohibiting  discussion  about  detention 
management  and  reform.  the  three  subcommittees  wrote  two  additional  chapters  to 
address those concerns. additionally, ice limited the committees access to the material 
it had requested to make the informed assessments that dhs had asked us to make. the 
committee received few of the documents it had requested, and most of them came late. 
many of the documents that ice withheld (for example, executed contracts) are documents 
routinely placed by state and local governments on their websites. 
notwithstanding these setbacks, within a year of its formation and six months of its charge, 
on  october  7,  2016,  the acfrc  unanimously  adopted  the  166-page  report  that  it  had 
produced, consisting of seven chapters, five appendixes, and 282 recommendations, most 
notably recommendation 1-1, which provides in part:

dhs  immigration enforcement practices should  operationalize the  presumption 
that detention is generally neither appropriate nor necessary for families  and that 
detention or the separation of families for purposes of immigration enforcement or 
management are never in the best interest of children. dhs should discontinue the 
general use of family detention, reserving it for rare cases when necessary following 
an individualized assessment of the need to detain because of danger or flight risk 
that cannot be mitigated by conditions of release.45 

ice  posted  the acfrcs  final  report  on  the  dhs  website  in  december  2016,  without 
comment.46 

43   see ice (2015) for the committee charter (n.b., the government changed the name of the committee at 
some point between its inception and completion of its task.) 
44   see acfrc (2016, 25).
45   ibid., 6. 
46   the report is available at https://www.ice.gov/acfrc. 

465

weeping in the playtime of othersthe  homeland  security  advisory  council  subcommittee  on 

privatized immigration detention facilities
several months prior to the acfrcs submission of its report and recommendations to 
secretary  johnson  and  director  saldana,  secretary  johnson  formed  a  subcommittee  of 
the homeland security advisory council to look at ices use of privatized immigration 
detention facilities. the impetus for the tasking was an august 18, 2016, announcement by 
the us department of justice: the attorney general directed the bureau of prisons (bop) 
to reduce and ultimately end its use of private prisons. initially, the secretary rejected the 
suggestion that dhs follow suit with a comparable reexamination of ices use of private 
prisons to hold civil detained individuals including families. he dismissed the suggestion 
outright,  stating  the  situations  were  not  comparable  because  the  time  spent  by  federal 
prisoners in bop facilities is longer than that spent by federal detained individuals in ice 
facilities. within a week however, he had reconsidered his position, directing in part that 
a subcommittee of the homeland security advisory council  address ices current 
policy  and  practices  concerning  the  use  of  private  immigration  detention  facilities  and 
evaluate whether this practice should be eliminated.47 the subcommittee completed its 
report on december 1, 2016 (see hsac 2016).
top among its core recommendations, but its placement appreciably diminished by the 
dissention of 17 of its 24 members who dissented from the conclusion that reliance on 
private prisons should, or inevitably must, continue was this:

fiscal  considerations,  combined  with  the  need  for  realistic  capacity  to  handle 
sudden  increases  in  detention,  indicate  that  dhss  use  of  private  for-profit 
detention continue but continuation should come with improved and expanded ice 
oversight, and with further exploration of other models to enhance ice control, 
responsiveness,  and  sense  of  accountability  for  daily  operations  at  all  detention 
facilities.

(ibid., 2)
of note are several related and recent dates. on november 3, 2016, a month after the acfrc 
submitted its report that contained a number of recommendations to curtail outsourcing, 
and a month before the subcommittee released its report, ice extended its contract with 
corecivic48 until 2021, to operate dilley as a frc. on december 3, 2016, two days after 
the release of the subcommittees report, the 250th district court issued its final ruling 
preventing the texas department of family and protective services from issuing licenses 
to corecivic to operate dilley and the geo group to operate karnes as frcs. the impact 
of the ruling is clear  until dilley and karnes achieve stature as non-secure and licensed 
facilities, pursuant to the flores agreement, ice may not use them to detain families. the 
texas attorney general is appealing (see crowther, n.d.).
it is unlikely that the trump administration will call upon the acfrc or even read its 
report. however, given the considerable and conscientious effort that the committee made 
to  provide  meaningful,  implementation-worthy  recommendations  to  dhs,  its  members 

47   see volume 81 of the federal register, page 60,713 (sept. 2, 2016). 
48   corecivic was formerly cca. 

466

journal on migration and human securityhave been particularly disheartened to learn that conditions at the facilities slipped, rather 
than improved, during the final days of the obama administration and the first days of the 
trump administration.

ices intentions and activities: incarcergration
i  joined  dhs  at  the  beginning  of  the  obama  administration.  before  then,  i  worked 
primarily in large city jail and state correctional systems in senior management positions.49 
upon appointment, my primary assignment was to document ices detention and removal 
policies and practices, and in its place oversee implementation of a civil, civil system of 
oversight for individuals awaiting determinations of relief or removal (dhs 2009). 
throughout my tenure in washington, dc, i spent much of the time in the field. i toured the 
facilities that ice used in every part of the country and spoke with its enforcement agents 
and attorneys, sheriffs staff and private prison personnel, the people ice had detained as 
well as released, and their attorneys and advocates. i gathered agency data, reviewed reports 
by government agencies and human rights organizations, and analyzed the information. 
the  impressions  that  i  formed  about  ices  activities  and  its  operation  during  the  first 
facility tours stayed with me to the last. everything that i have seen or heard since then, 
fortifies those findings. reminiscent of an article that i had read as an undergraduate  
body ritual of the nacirema (miner 1956)  it struck me that ice approached detention of 
immigrants in much the same manner as had the fictitious anthropologist who came upon 
the nacirema.50 his observations of the nacirema people were without context. his lack 
of knowledge about and empathy for the actors he observed and his inability to understand 
their actions left him clueless. i thought it strikingly similar to our governments handling 
of foreign-born persons in its custody. 
csar cuauhtmoc garca hernndez, publisher of the blog crimmigration.com, argues 
persuasively that policymakers likely turned to criminal law and procedure  crimmigration 
as it is now known (garca hernndez 2014)  to legitimize the exclusion of the foreign-
born deemed to be undesirable. in the same way, correction policy and practice has been 
used to manage the foreign-born in civil custody. anil kalhan, chair of the international 
human rights committee of the new york city bar association, effectively makes the 
case that for many noncitizens, the experience of detention is as punitive as incarceration 
and a deprivation as severe as removal. kalhan posits that if the overall convergence has 
given rise to crimmigration law,51 then excessive immigration detention practices as those 
described  in  my  report  (schriro  2009)  have  also  morphed  into  a  para-punitive  system, 
immcarceration (kalhan 2010; see also kalhan 2014).

 
 
49   i served as warden and later, commissioner of the st. louis jail system, assistant commissioner of the new 
york city department of correction and department director of both the missouri and arizona departments 
of correction prior to joining dhs. immediately after leaving dhs, i was the commissioner of the new york 
city department of correction. since 2014, i have held the positions of commissioner of the connecticut 
department of emergency services and public protection and the states homeland security advisor. 
50   nacirema is america spelled backwards.
51   see also crimmigration.com. 

467

weeping in the playtime of othersmy perspective as practitioner, errant ethnographer, and non-practicing attorney, is similar 
to those of garca hernndez and kalhan, but it is not at all the same. i am particularly 
interested in the conflation of what should be clear distinctions within and between the 
criminal and civil justice systems and the many people under its control. the following facets 
are especially illustrative of the inclination to see the populations as interchangeable, and 
predictive of the ways in which we respond to both of them. they are: (1) the administrative 
purposes of each form of incapacitation; (2) the case law that governs the criminal and civil 
systems; (3) the needs and risks that each population presents; (4) the extent to which the 
public, press, and policymakers are aware of these differences; (5) the unique sensibilities 
and skills sets each workforce needs to satisfy its systems minimum requirements; and (6) 
the requisite infrastructure to support each systems goals and objectives. 
if i were to give the criminalization of immigration a name, i would call it incarcergration. 
pervasive points of view and prejudices conflate the roles and responsibilities of decision-
makers, the legal bases and limitations for the decisions they make, the inferences drawn 
from detention and its trappings, the rights really afforded the accused, and the wholesale 
adoption of one set of strategies for a wholly different set of circumstances. 
there are statutory distinctions between the administrative purposes of civil detention and 
criminal incarceration. they are noteworthy but widely unknown. many people, including 
those who work in these facilities and members of the press corps, believe both suspects 
are  remanded  to  jail  and  the  guilty  are  sentenced  to  prison  for  punishment. they  also 
believe the foreign-born in ice detention facilities and frcs are guilty, and that there 
are no mitigating circumstances and detention should be punitive. in fact, neither pre-trial 
criminal detention nor civil detention may ever be for a punitive purpose. only after a plea 
or conviction may the criminal court impose a sentence of incarceration as punishment. 
the  public  is  also  largely  unaware  of  the  extent  to  which  the  protections  afforded  the 
accused vary. the criminal justice system has many decision makers, each with distinct 
duties at every decision point and each one acting independently of the others. in marked 
contrast, to varying degrees, both cbp and ice determine who to stop, question, and take 
into custody, who to release and under what conditions, who to detain and how long, and 
where to detain persons in its custody and under what conditions. in sum, dhs is short 
on checks and balances. the criminal justice system assures that the accused  citizens 
and noncitizens alike  receive the miranda warning and are provided counsel if they 
cannot afford representation under most circumstances. the civil justice system does not. 
the case law concerning the care that government must afford persons in criminal and 
civil custody also differs widely. the development of correction law over the past number 
of  years  has  measurably  improved  conditions  of  confinement  for  both  pre-trial  and 
sentenced prisoners. the correction case law is also the basis for correctional standards. 
in combination, corrections case law and correctional standards set a basis for minimum 
operating expectations, a basis for that which is constitutional. on the other hand, there is 
little case law specific to civil detention. where it exists, it primarily concerns ices family 
residential centers (frcs), but ice has failed to incorporate any of the provisions in flores 
into its frc standards.52 as inadequate and inappropriate as correctional standards are for 

52   see footnote 8.

468

journal on migration and human securityanyone in ices custody, if, in fact, ice adhered to those standards, then conditions would 
improve markedly and immediately.   
there is also considerable hyperbole about the risk that immigrants present. ice has long 
asserted that it goes after only the worst of the worst. in 2009, the report demonstrated 
this was not the case. most detainees had no criminal record and among those who did, just 
over 10 percent were uniform crime reporting part i crimes. the majority were traffic 
offenses, simple assault, and larceny (schriro 2009, 6). dhs recently announced it would 
release weekly declined detainer outcome reports that would include notable criminal 
activity (ice 2017). dhs released just three weekly reports then suspended publication 
due to numerous complaints by state and local jurisdictions that ice had mischaracterized 
their actions as uncooperative. although the information released by dhs is limited, 
it suggests a significant shift in focus from the removal of persons with final dispositions 
to those with dropped charges, another complementary finding to a comprehensive study 
conducted at the midpoint of the obama administration (kerwin 2015). 
as both garca hernndez and kalhan have suggested, our fear of persons who do not 
look like us, speak our language, or worship as we do, is advanced through legal policy 
and practice. i am concerned that these beliefs harden with ices continued use of private 
prisons, county jails, and electronic monitoring. the razor-ribbon fences, the correctional 
personnel staffing the facilities, the orange jumpsuits issued to the people it detains and the 
manner in which they are managed  standing counts throughout the day, scheduled and 
unscheduled searches and shakedowns, random drug testing, personal property limitations 
and  the  like    all  mirror  the  ways  in  which  criminals  are  confined. adoption  of  the 
correctional principles of care, custody, and control imposes more restrictions and incurs 
more  cost  than  are  necessary  to  manage  effectively  the  vast  majority  of  this  particular 
population. in fact, the majority of people that ice encounters are contributing members 
of intact families; they have job skills and are employed or employable; they own or owned 
homes; they pay taxes; and they vote in the countries that permitted participation. there is 
no basis in fact to treat the vast majority of persons subject to mandatory detention as ice 
treats them, but for the medium it selected to use to detain them. 
ice  is  composed  primarily  of  law  enforcement  personnel  with  extensive  expertise 
performing removal functions, but not in the design and delivery of non-secure facilities 
and community-based alternatives. ices inclination to approach everyone in its custody as 
a hazard to the homeland is consistent with its enforcement orientation. this is why ices 
agents and attorneys should not be its primary decision makers, and, to the extent that ice 
must detain or place anyone on community supervision, it should call upon individuals 
with expertise in these areas to assume these responsibilities.  
ice continues to expand its capacity to monitor and confine persons in its custody but not 
to put into place the systems needed to sustain lawfully and humanely such an undertaking. 
ice operates the largest system of incarceration in the country and it does so without the 
policies and practices imbedded in the case law that have advanced the field of corrections 
and the incarceration of pre-trial defendants and sentenced prisoners. it does so without any 
of the organizational infrastructure necessary to operate a system of any size effectively 
and  efficiently,  and  without  mastering  the  most  basic  management  tools  to  provide 
adequately for children, adults, the ill, infirm and elderly, persons whose primary language 

469

weeping in the playtime of othersis other than english, or asylum seekers. ices current, rapid expansion of enforcement 
activities is not a basis to relax or relinquish the gains realized over the past several years. 
it pays a significant sum for the beds that it buys. there is no reason not to demand as 
much, or more, in exchange from those with which it contracts. instead, ice should build 
upon these reforms, employing the management tools and informational systems now in 
place, affirming its relationships with the legal community and community partners, and 
accurately conveying its activities to congress and the country. 

conclusions and recommendations
i wrote most of this article in the final months of the obama administration. at that time, 
my perspective of the past two terms was something of a glass half-full point of view. 
my  thought  at  the  time  was  that  the  policy  and  practice  of  incarcerating  families  are 
infirm but when families are held, the frcs must meet the courts minimum expectations. 
instead of steady progress, ice was stuck if not backsliding, as the obama administration 
ended.53 among  its  many  deficiencies,  access  to  counsel  was  more  erratic  than  earlier 
in the presidents tenure. ice made it more difficult for pro-bono counsel to access the 
attorney-client consultation rooms and for law students and support staff to accompany the 
lawyers. attorneys also encountered greater difficulty meeting with their clients at dilley 
and karnes. reports also began to surface again of cbp agents not permitting asylum 
seekers to enter the united states as is required by law. episodic reports of cbp agents 
telling asylum seekers who presented themselves at ports of entry that they could not do 
so, they had to come back another day, or they had to make an appointment with mexican 
authorities rose once again (partlow 2016).
prior to publication, i was able to review and refresh the paper after the first several months 
of the trump administration. during that time the policy and practice of ice detention has 
become so egregious that the existence, expansion, and operation of frcs seemed benign 
by comparison. the glass is now half-empty. the case law that has come about since the 
inception of frcs, largely by means of flores, has come undone. now cpb is separating 
children from their parents at the border, rendering the minor children unaccompanied, 
remanding the older children to adult detention facilities as adults, but not with their adult 
family members (see cssp 2017; ktla 5 2017a,b; wrc, lirs, and kind 2017). 
in any administration  indeed, in every administration  dhss main mission is national 
emergency  planning  and  preparedness.  influxes  of  individuals  at  our  borders,  seeking 
safety and freedom, are an integral part of our history. in all instances, it is essential that 
dhs adequately anticipate and lawfully address these periodic increases in families with 
children and others. history teaches that these influxes are certain to happen in response to 
onerous conditions that prompt people in other countries to migrate. while marked changes 
in policy from one administration to the next is an integral part of our nations history, dhs 
must put in place competent and comprehensive policies and practices that address the 
unique needs of families  a critical undertaking that requires a commitment to continuous 
53   oversight of united states immigration and customs enforcement, hearing before the committee on the 
judiciary, house of representatives, 114th congress, second session, september 22, 2016, serial no. 114
94. u.s. government publishing office, washington: 2016. the purpose of the hearing was to . . . examine 
how our immigration laws are enforced and how this enforcement affects our communities (ibid., 2).

470

journal on migration and human securityimprovement, well-reasoned and thoroughly researched solutions, and hard work. this is 
what any administration should do. this is what we should hold them accountable to do. 

specific remedies: karnes, dilley, and berks family residential 

centers
the flores agreement established binding standards for the detention and treatment of 
immigrant children in government custody in 1997. nearly 20 years has passed and the us 
government continues to resist compliance with flores when it should embrace its tenets 
in full. to this end, ice should immediately cease the expansion of the karnes, dilley, 
and berks rfcs and release as many families as are permitted by law. further, ice should 
provide timely notice that it will not renew any of its family detention contracts. to the 
extent that ice needs beds for only the briefest detention of any families, dhs must use 
only non-secure and licensed facilities, all of them small in scale and situated in easily 
assessable communities.

overall  reform  of  detention  policies  and  practices  affecting 

families and children 
my experiences working at ice at the beginning of the obama administrations first term 
and serving in a volunteer capacity as a member of the acfrc at the end of its second 
term reaffirmed several significant observations about making change happen. first, the 
inclination of organizations to resist change is deeply ingrained, more so when there is 
significant tension between its perceived mission and its mandate. this is certainly the case 
with ice, which is expert in enforcement but is also responsible for the safety and well-
being of detained individuals, despite its lack of affinity for and expertise in this area, from 
their apprehension through adjudication to removal or relief. second, individual change 
agents acting under the auspices of authority can find and fix any number of deficiencies, 
but a critical mass of like-minded agents in the field is necessary to keep the processes on 
course and to sustain what the several change agents achieve. establishing the office of 
detention policy and planning (odpp) to diagnose problems and develop solutions but 
not to authorize it to undertake the implementation and enforcement of those reforms is a 
significant  and likely an insurmountable  impediment. on the other hand, anything that 
an organization fails to do or undoes, the administration can fix, if it so chooses. the obama 
administration did not. the 2009 report was its roadmap to reform the detention system and 
although adopted in full in the end, it chose not to prioritize its implementation. odpp was 
the means by which the obama administration would accomplish its recommendations. 
within the first 100 days of the trump administration, dhs announced odpp would close, 
shuttering for now any executive branch efforts to ensure those in its custody are afforded 
basic protections (dickerson 2017a; see also schriro 2017).
the decision to detain foreign-born persons is sometimes necessary as a matter of law, but 
more often than not, it is discretionary. less discretion by government actors and clearer 
direction and more oversight by the government would produce better results more quickly. 
as suggested by recent reports of cbp agents along the border exercising impermissible 
discretion, the government should immediately provide clearer direction and more oversight, 

471

weeping in the playtime of othersnot less, to ensure compliance with law by its agents as well as asylum seekers. likewise, 
the government should ensure ice agents afford foreign-born families all of the protections 
provided by law. although the pre-election posture of the trump administration suggests 
this is unlikely to occur, it should not approach the following obligations as optional. 
first, case law prohibits deterrence-based detention policies. rather than pursue nominal 
changes, such as licensing frcs that have not met minimum requirements and insisting secure 
facilities are non-secure, ice should adopt a presumption against detention, particularly in 
the case of families, women, and asylum seekers. ice should also make every effort to 
mitigate impediments to community placement. when timely release into the community 
is not feasible, ice should release families intact on their own recognizance or on parole. 
to ensure its decisions are informed and uniform, ice should use validated instruments to 
individualize determinations of the least restrictive means to ensure court appearances. ice 
should make these assessments, and not delegate these important decisions to vendors, who 
will likely act in their own financial self-interest. where detention is required, it should not 
be lengthy. when alternatives suffice, individual circumstances should serve as the basis 
for their formulation. the least restrictive means is always the preferred option. ice should 
only  employ  electronic  monitoring,  cash  bond,  and  other  more  restrictive  means  when 
demonstrably necessary. 
secondly, to realize these results, ice must acquire the expertise within its ranks to create 
and maintain the infrastructure necessary to perform all of the unique duties associated with 
detention and its alternatives. these skill sets include the writing and revision of written 
instruction,  the  training  and  retraining  of  personnel,  and  the  selection  and  replacement 
of providers. imbued in everything that it does, ice must establish and adhere to clear 
standards of care that do not follow a penal model and are responsive to families, women, 
and asylum seekers. this involves, in part, establishing a system of informed immigration 
enforcement, including management tools and informational systems capable of building 
and maintaining a continuum of care for those who must remain in ice custody.54 absent 
this infrastructure, it is unlikely that ice will base its community placements or detention 
strategies on objective, individually assessed risk and need or utilize the least restrictive 
means to achieve compliance. if the trump administration is unwilling or unable to make 
this happen, then congress or the courts should expand the charge of odpp (dickerson 
2017a) to include executing all decisions regarding detention and alternatives to detention 
or relocate odpp to the office of the dhs secretary. in either case, operating independently 
from ice would position odpp to mirror the criminal justice systems checks and balances 
in the civil systems decision making. 
lastly, there must be a commitment to excellence, transparency, and accountability within 
dhs and throughout the three branches of the government. there are many examples of 
strong and appropriate agency efforts, court involvement, and congressional oversight but 
none of them has been sufficiently swift or sustained to achieve their intended outcomes. 
meaningful reform will also require the active and on-going participation by its partners, 

54   given the governments renewed emphasis on raids to achieve more rapid removals, families placed in 
expedited removal proceedings should receive an individualized custody assessment immediately after a 
credible or reasonable fear finding, taking into account the familys individual circumstances and the specific 
likelihood that they pose a flight risk or danger to the community.

472

journal on migration and human securitynotably,  the  legal  community  and  advocacy  organizations.  it  will  take  a  village  to 
undertake an endeavor as comprehensive as this one, but this village will have the capacity 
to create a smarter, stronger, and sustainable state. to ensure that the united states realizes 
its  commitment  to  continuous  improvement  leadership  should  ensure  that  an  effective 
complaint mechanism is in place, that performance metrics are collected, and outcomes 
published  to  inform  decision  making  and  assure  stakeholders  that  there  is  sufficient 
accountability within the system. 

the trump challenge: truth or consequences 

depending upon ones policy and politics, the first 100 days of the trump administration 
have been either very dark or bright. many have said the same of the obama administration. 
at one time or another, all of us may be tempted to tamp back our efforts, let go of higher 
expectations, wait for the next administration, or push back and soldier on. whatever our 
position, our collective time may be better served looking for common ground, core values, 
and a shared sense of our higher selves, proud to be the nation known for taking in the tired 
and the weary, a country committed to fresh starts and second chances. 
in the end, our government consists of three branches, each with its own standing and 
strength. the executive branch can only do that which the legislative and judiciary branches 
allow, and the legislative and judicial branches can undo some of what the executive does. 
then, of course, there are all of us, the citizenry. that gives all of us many opportunities in 
every administration to unite and get it right, to make and sustain sufficient improvements, 
so that in our country there are no longer children weeping in the playtime of the others. 

