enforcement, integration, and the 
future of immigration federalism

cristina rodriguez  
yale law school

executive summary
the  federal  government  has  a  monopoly  over  the  terms  of  immigration 
law, and it superintends the nations singular immigration enforcement 
bureaucracy. but our federalism nonetheless provides a vital playing field 
for sharp debates over the status of immigrants in american life. the forms 
of state and local involvement in immigration policy are varied, but they fall 
into two basic categories of mutually dependent and re-enforcing policies: 
enforcement federalism and integration federalism. whereas enforcement 
federalism concerns the extent to which localities should assist or resist 
federal  removal  policies,  integration  federalism  encompasses  measures 
designed  to  assist  immigrants,  regardless  of  status,  to  plant  roots  and 
acculturate to life in the united states. 
both forms of immigration federalism take shape through a wide variety 
of intergovernmental relations, not only between the federal government 
on the one hand and states and localities on the other, but also between 
states and the cities within them  an increasingly important dimension 
of  immigration  federalism  today.  these  relations  have  important  legal 
characteristics, and constitutional and statutory law bring them into being 
and mediate them. but the nature of any given intergovernmental dynamic 
will be shaped just as much by a combination of ideology and institutional 
imperatives. these elements can either unite the center and the periphery 
in common cause or produce the sort of conflict that has made immigration 
federalism a high-profile issue for decades.
given  the  density  of  the  intergovernmental  dynamics  that  shape  the 
countrys  immigration  policy,  developing  a  comprehensive  strategy  for 
immigration federalism requires more than a predilection toward or away 
from centralization of government authority. it requires a clear view on 
the appropriate metes and bounds of immigration enforcement, as well as 
a set of beliefs about the proper place in the social order of immigrants 
with different legal statuses. while this essay remains largely (though not 
entirely) agnostic on these questions, it offers four basic principles to frame 
any future federalism agenda.
first, when it comes to enforcement federalism, the federal government 
ought  to  acknowledge  the  reasons  that  localities  might  resist  federal 
enforcement efforts, at least as a matter of politics, and if only to ensure that 

 2017 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 5 number 2 (2017): 509-540federal policy is subjected to accountability checks by competing, external 
pressures.  second,  whatever  the  value  of  resistance  to  enforcement,  a 
federalism  agenda  should  include  efforts  by  all  levels  of  government  to 
identify a manageable equilibrium that reconciles the federal governments 
constitutional and statutory responsibilities for maintaining an enforcement 
regime  with  the  local  politics  of  immigration  and  the  lived  realities  of 
immigrant communities. third, when it comes to integration federalism, 
the problem of illegal immigration must be solved, and only the federal 
government can do so decisively. federalism can only mediate the political 
conflict over status and help set the terms for its ultimate resolution. and 
yet, the structural reasons that have given rise to integration federalism 
should re-enforce the countrys commitment to locally driven integration 
policy, supported by a national-level commitment to information sharing, 
coordination, and resource support. finally, because both enforcement and 
integration policy require systemic flexibility, it is important not to confuse 
arguments on the merits of immigration policy with structural claims. in 
other words, scholars, advocates, or policymakers should exercise humility 
and  circumspection  when  developing  conversation-stopping  claims  that 
a  certain  intergovernmental  relation  is  required  by  law,  especially  in  a 
context as charged as immigration policy. 

introduction
conventional wisdom has it that immigration law is an exclusive federal domain governed 
by uniform rules and policies. and yet, american federalism has meant that states and 
localities have helped shape immigration policy throughout history, often through deliberate 
resistance  to  the  federal  government.  during  the  obama  years,  the arizona  model  of 
federalism drew the spotlight, as the state legislature and other like-minded jurisdictions 
enacted sweeping immigration enforcement measures with great fanfare, in part to rebuke 
the more tempered federal policy of the day. in a highly unusual response, the obama 
administration sued the states, and the supreme court eventually vindicated the federal 
governments  exclusive  authority  to  set  enforcement  priorities.1  today,  the  preeminent 
intergovernmental  script  has  flipped  to  what  we  might  call  the  california  model.  pro-
immigration states and localities are directly challenging a presidential administration bent 
on ever-tougher enforcement justified with alarmist rhetoric about immigrations dangers. 
but even as resistant localities force the federal government to defend its policies in court, 
the trump administration finds itself buttressed by yet a third model, according to which 
states like texas and north carolina enact legislation to disable their own pro-immigration 
cities from resisting federal enforcement. immigration federalism is in constant flux. 
though  these  high-profile  contretemps  keep  immigration  federalism  a  part  of  public 
discourse, state and local governments long have been de facto immigration policymakers 
in myriad and more mundane ways. the complexity of intergovernmental relations in our 
federalist  system  sets  a  crucial  framework  for  immigration  policymaking.  though  the 
immigration and nationality act (ina) and related statutes span hundreds of pages in the 

1   arizona v. united states, 567 u.s. __, 132 s.ct. 2492 (2012).

510

journal on migration and human securityus code, the secular expansion of the federal immigration machinery over the last century 
has not displaced immigration federalism, for one simple reason common to many spheres 
of regulation. immigrant settlement and immigration enforcement are fundamentally spatial 
and territorial, thus implicating the politics and bureaucracies of our federal system. our 
national immigration policy is, in fact, debated and set through various intergovernmental 
relationships  mostly between the federal government and cities and counties, but also 
between the federal government and states, between states and the cities within them, and 
by each of these jurisdictions acting autonomously.2
at any given time, immigration federalism simultaneously re-enforces and resists federal 
policy, and the political valence of immigration is often in flux. the ideological diversity in 
government that federalism produces ensures this state of tension, as does the fact that the 
institutional interests of federal and local actors do not always align, regardless of partisan 
affiliation.  for  example,  even  as  the  current  department  of  homeland  security  (dhs) 
finds itself in conflict with certain state and local officials who seek to provide immigrants 
with  sanctuary,3  the  administration  and  allies  in  congress  aspire  to  recruit  still  other 
local officials in an affirmative push to amplify federal enforcement efforts. republicans in 
charge of the federal government have not given on up on federalism  they simply want 
it to serve their ends. 
to understand the metes and bounds of immigration federalism, it will be useful to break the 
concept down into two categories: enforcement federalism and integration federalism. the 
legal, institutional, and political conditions governing each variant of federalism differ. the 
former entails the local relationship to federal removal policy and its many tools of coercion, 
and it is dominated by debates over legal authority and intergovernmental relations. the 
latter implicates affirmative strategies to either promote or prevent immigrant incorporation 
into the body politic and may have little if anything to do with federal policy, which is 
itself limited in scope and ambition. though legal questions arise, integration primarily 
raises questions of political will and bureaucratic capacity, and states and localities long 
have taken the lead in devising our nations affirmative integration agenda. and so even 
as we might seek to control or temper local involvement in immigration enforcement, any 
integration agenda ought to have states and localities at its center.
on some level, this enforcement-integration dichotomy is too stark. enforcement policy 
heavily affects immigrants prospects for integration. enforcement policy  is integration 
policy. enforcement federalism encompasses local refusal to assist federal enforcement 
in order to protect immigrants in the community, as well as federal-state cooperation to 
deport  immigrants,  or  otherwise  create  incentives  for  immigrants  to  leave.  in  addition, 
affirmative integration policies, or the lack thereof, can influence immigrant movement, 
either attracting immigrants to welcoming jurisdictions, or driving them away by creating 
inhospitable  climates  for  settlement. whether  a  locality  creates  a  receptive  climate  for 

2   for ease of exposition, when invoking states and county and local governments at once, i use the terms 
localities and local jurisdictions. but where it makes a material difference to the analysis to refer to states 
versus cities, i use these more specific terms. 
3   as discussed in more detail below, the term sanctuary is an evocative yet somewhat misleading label for 
a set of policies that really ought to go by the more pedestrian term noncooperation, because they limit the 
extent to which local police and other officials assist federal immigration enforcement efforts.

511

enforcement, integration, and the future of immigration federalismintegration can help shape the size and nature of the enforcement domain in any given 
local setting. but as with any overly reductive dichotomy, this one can help us organize the 
debate over the state and local role in immigration.4 
the intergovernmental dynamics and politics that shape immigration federalism are certainly 
governed by ongoing debates concerning legal authority. the extent to which localities can 
establish immigration priorities that diverge from federal policy, and the scope of federal 
authority to reign localities in, set the ground rules for intergovernmentalism. but even if 
these legal lines were crystal clear, defining an actual agenda for immigration federalism 
requires answering far more contested questions. should our default assumption be that 
immigration ought to be controlled? or, should our animating objective be that immigrant 
communities be allowed to flourish? when and how do these objectives conflict? 
in this paper, i remain largely agnostic on these policy questions, focusing instead on how 
federalism provides a framework for answering them. but this framework ultimately points 
to four very basic goals for a federalism strategy. first, when it comes to enforcement 
federalism, it will be important to acknowledge the reasons for local resistance to federal 
enforcement, at least as a matter of politics, and if only to ensure that federal policy is 
subject  to  checks  by  competing,  external  pressures.  second,  the  value  of  resistance 
to  enforcement  notwithstanding,  a  federalism  agenda  should  include  efforts  to  identify 
a  manageable  equilibrium  that  reconciles  the  federal  governments  constitutional  and 
statutory  responsibilities  for  maintaining  an  enforcement  regime  with  the  local  politics 
of immigration and the lived realities of immigrant communities. third, when it comes to 
integration federalism, the structural reasons that have given rise to it should re-enforce a 
commitment to locally driven integration policy, supported by a national-level commitment 
to information sharing, coordination, and resource support. finally, to preserve the systemic 
flexibility that immigration policy requires, scholars, advocates, and policymakers should 
be circumspect about launching hard-edged legal claims concerning the scope of power 
held by any one level of government, mindful that structural doctrines that advance ones 
preferred policy objectives in one context might do the opposite in another.
to develop these conclusions, i explore three sets of issues. i begin with and devote the bulk 
of the discussion to enforcement federalism  the most legally and politically contested 
domain of immigration federalism with the sharpest intergovernmental conflict. i establish 
the legal parameters of enforcement federalism and identify the institutional considerations 
that should inform any strategic thinking about federalisms future. i then briefly explore 
the role that federalism plays in immigrant integration. finally, though the federal-local 
relationship  has  dominated  immigration  federalism,  that  should  change.  the  future  of 
immigration federalism is likely to be shaped significantly by another intergovernmental 
dynamic    the  state-local  relationship.  i  thus  conclude  by  highlighting  how  tensions 
between states and their localities reflect and define the national debate over immigration. 

4    the  dichotomy  is  useful  as  a  way  of  separating  those  policies  that  are  specifically  concerned  with 
intergovernmental relations between washington and the periphery (enforcement federalism) and those that 
arise largely through autonomous state action (immigrant integration), even as they might present preemption 
concerns or involve coordination with federal actors through grant programs and the like.

512

journal on migration and human securityi. enforcement federalism: a tale of legal and political 
flux
formally  speaking,  immigration  enforcement  constitutes  an  exclusive  federal  domain. 
in  contrast  to  the  criminal  justice  system,  states  and  localities  do  not  operate  parallel 
immigration laws, police, prosecutors, and judges. congress defines the exclusive grounds 
for  entry  and  removal,  and  the  executive  branch  enforces  those  provisions  through  an 
extensive federal bureaucracy. 
but federalism helps shape immigration enforcement policy for two primary reasons. first, 
criminal convictions under state law constitute many of the grounds of removal set out in 
the us code. accordingly, state criminal justice systems feed the immigration bureaucracy 
(motomura 2011). second, though the federal enforcement bureaucracy is vast, it has certain 
crucial limitations. it consists of few beat cops who interact on a regular basis with the 
regulated immigrant community, and its investigative resources tend to be used for large 
operations rather than ordinary policing. to identify, apprehend, and remove noncitizens, 
dhs depends on the local, county, and state police and corrections officials who come into 
contact with noncitizens through arrests and other means. our immigration enforcement 
regime is thus best characterized as vertically integrated, even though immigration law 
itself is defined exclusively at the federal level (rodriguez 2012).
enforcement federalism, as i define it, is thus expressly about intergovernmental relations 
between the periphery and the center. the character and extent of the systems integration 
has been in flux in recent years. the system is never fully coherent at any moment in time, 
because federalisms many agents inevitably create intergovernmental friction and pockets 
of  tension  between  washington  and  the  local.  federalism  actually  consists  of  myriad 
intergovernmental relations rather than a singular federal-local dynamic. ideological and 
partisan considerations, as well as institutional factors, shape these many relations. 
ideologically speaking, the mayors and police of large, immigrant-heavy cities such as 
new york are more likely to end up in conflict with a republican executive than with a 
democratic one. pro-enforcement states such as arizona are more likely to challenge or 
resist the enforcement policy of a federal government in democratic hands and embrace 
or re-enforce the policies of a republican executive. but the logistics of federalism can 
also transcend or stymie these partisan alignments. the institutional interests of the center 
and periphery sometimes diverge, regardless of partisan alignment. even as it sought to 
advance pro-immigration politics, for example, the obama administration maintained a 
robust enforcement and removals agenda, precipitating local resistance from democratic 
governors  and  mayors  that  complicated  (but  did  not  necessarily  undermine)  dhs 
enforcement. in addition, despite efforts by the obama-era dhs to centralize enforcement 
policy, it could not eschew reliance on state and local cooperation altogether. 
because of this intergovernmental complexity, enforcement will entail a mix of centralization 
and diffusion, regardless of the ideology or party in charge of the federal government. 
indeed, it would be difficult to identify an optimal level of centralization for enforcement 
policy in any objective sense. instead, the extent of federal control is always likely to be 
contested and contingent. 

513

enforcement, integration, and the future of immigration federalismthe range of intergovernmental possibilities for enforcement policy can be conceptualized 
through  a  simple  two-by-two  matrix.  the  x-axis  describes  the  orientation  of  local 
jurisdictions  to  the  federal  government,  with  the  strategies  of  resistance  to  federal 
priorities  on  the  one  hand  and  cooperation  with  federal  priorities  on  the  other. the 
y-axis describes the inclinations of local jurisdictions toward immigration enforcement, 
with enforcement skepticism on the one hand and zealous enforcement on the other. 
                                     resistance to                       cooperation with 
                                    federal priorities                  federal priorities

t
n
e
m
e
c
r
o
f
n
e
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

m
s
i
c
i
t
p
e
k
s

 
s
u
o
l
a
e
z

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
t
n
e
m
e
c
r
o
f
n
e

each of the combinations thus identified reflects both ideological positions on immigration 
policy  and  power  relationships  between  the  periphery  and  the  center.  different  legal 
parameters and policy possibilities define each type of enforcement federalism, and each 
should be considered in turn. in so doing, it remains important to keep in mind that resistance 
and  cooperation  dynamics  will  operate  under  any  given  presidential  administration, 
even as the locations of resistance and cooperation change. but because of institutional 
considerations, tensions can arise between the periphery and the center, even when they are 
ideologically aligned. to varying degrees, the federal government will use the legal tools at 
its disposal to bring local jurisdictions in line with its own policy p