immigration reform and 
administrative relief for 2014 
and beyond: a report on behalf 
of the committee for immigration 
reform implementation (ciri), 
human resources working group1

charles kamasaki
national council of la raza

susan timmons
american immigration lawyers association

courtney tudi
world relief

with amelia collins (national council of la raza), jack holmgren, (catholic legal 
immigration network), donald kerwin (center for migration studies), and kerry 
obrien (equal justice works)

executive summary
successful  implementation  of  any  broad-scale  immigrant  legalization 
program  requires  an  adequately  funded  infrastructure  of  immigrant-
serving organizations. in 2014, president obama announced an expanded 
deferred action for childhood arrivals (daca) program, as well as the 
deferred action for parents of citizens and lawful permanent residents 
(dapa)  program,  which  would  make  it  possible  for  approximately  five 
million people to attain lawful, albeit temporary, status and employment 
authorization. as the initial daca program instituted in 2012 has already 
stretched the capacity of immigrant-serving organizations to their limits 
or even beyond them, the possibility of full implementation of dapa and 
the expanded daca programs presents a formidable challenge for these 
organizations.
in  this  paper,  the  human  resources  working  group  of  the  committee 
for immigration reform implementation (ciri) draws on the lessons of 

1  this article is the product of the human resources working group of the committee for immigration 
reform implementation (ciri). the views expressed may not reflect the opinions of the authors respective 
organizations, which are included for identification purposes only.

 2015 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 3 number 3 (2015): 283-305the immigrant reform and control act of 1986 (irca), daca, and other 
initiatives to provide a roadmap for immigrant service delivery agencies and 
their partners in planning for implementation of the expanded daca and 
the dapa programs, with an eye (ultimately) to broad legislative reform. 
in particular, this paper focuses on the funding and human resources that 
the immigrant service delivery field, writ large, would require to implement 
these programs. 
if expanded daca and dapa were implemented, the ciri working group 
estimates that, of the total of five million that may be eligible, 1.08 million 
individuals will require extensive application assistance, generating the 
need for approximately three times more full-time staff than are currently 
in the field. moreover, without additional funding and staff, agencies will 
likely not be able to shift a portion of staff time to accommodate any new 
program, even taking the typical fee-for-service model into account. thus, 
the paper identifies a pressing need for upfront funding as early in the 
program  as  possible  for  outreach,  public  education,  combating  notario 
fraud, advocacy, and assistance to self-filers.  
in terms of the financial resources needed, the working groups analysis 
shows that about $83 million, net after collection of fees, is a reasonable 
estimate for the potential nonprofit sector funding gap required to assure 
effective application assistance services to the eligible low-income people 
likely to apply for the expanded daca and dapa programs. wise front-
loaded  investments  can  help  to  maximize  coordination  and  minimize 
duplication,  ensure  education  and  outreach,  and  channel  applicants  to 
the  most  appropriate  sources  of  assistance.  while  investments  required 
to build the necessary infrastructure are significant, the costs will be far 
outweighed by the benefits, not just to the daca/dapa population but to 
the society at large.

introduction
although  it  may  not  seem  so  to  casual  observers,  the  journey  toward  comprehensive 
immigration reform is well underway. it began nearly 30 years ago with passage of the 
immigration  reform  and  control act  of  1986  (irca),  a  signature  achievement  of  the 
immigrant rights community. while irca led to the legalization of roughly three million 
persons, it failed to legalize sufficient numbers of unauthorized persons, to expedite family 
reunification, and to reform the underlying legal immigration system. those shortcomings, 
combined with largely ineffectual enforcement through the early 1990s, paved the way 
for the growth of the unauthorized population to nearly 12 million in the mid-2000s. the 
1990s provided some new milestones, including modest increases in legal immigration, 
limited legalizations of central american and haitian refugees, and harsh new enforcement 
measures. the journey continued with the introduction of the first of many comprehensive 
immigration reform bills a little over a decade ago, two of which passed the senate in 2006 
and 2013, respectively. 

284

journal on migration and human securityit moved slowly ahead with the release of the morton memo on prosecutorial discretion 
in june 2011. it made a huge leap forward with the deferred action for childhood arrivals 
(daca)  program  in  august  2012,  and  continued  with  the  department  of  homeland 
securitys issuance of a rule in january 2013 that eased the application process abroad 
for the immediate relatives of us citizens whose visa petitions have been approved. in 
june 2013, the senate passed comprehensive legislation, which was not considered in the 
house. the journey advanced with the advent of parole in place for relatives of active 
and formerly active us military personnel in november 2013, and with the haitian family 
reunification parole program, which allows for the parole and work authorization of the 
family members of us citizens and lawful permanent residents (lprs) two years before 
their immigrant visa priority date becomes current.   
in  one  of  the  most  momentous  developments  in  the  immigration  field  since  irca,  on 
november  20,  2014,  president  obama  announced  an  expanded  daca  program,  the 
deferred action for parents of citizens and lawful permanent residents (dapa) program, 
which covers the parents of us citizens and lprs, and an expanded provisional waiver 
program (form i-601a waivers). the dapa program will potentially cover 3.89 million 
persons and the expanded daca program 1.52 million, with 262,000 eligible for both 
programs (warren 2014).2 good estimates do not exist for the numbers of potential visa 
recipients covered by the provisional waiver program; however, this procedurewhich 
allows  unauthorized  persons  to  apply  for  a  waiver  to  unlawful  presence  prior  to  their 
departure  from  the  united  statescould  encourage  tens  of  thousands  to  secure  visas 
abroad that would permit their re-entry via the legal immigration system.  
although it appears that comprehensive legislative reform is unlikely in the immediate 
future,  the  development  of  an  implementation  infrastructure  is  essential  to  ensure  the 
success of interim immigration relief programs. in this paper, we seek to draw on the lessons 
of irca, daca, and other initiatives to provide a roadmap to guide immigrant service 
delivery agencies and their partners in planning for implementation of the expanded daca 
and the dapa programs, with an eye (ultimately) to broad legislative reform. in particular, 
this paper focuses on the funding and human resources that the immigrant service delivery 
field, writ large, will require to implement these programs.

history

immigration reform and control act (irca) legalization 

notwithstanding significant challenges and subsequent criticism, by almost every measure 
ircas legalization programs were highly successful. in sum:

  about 75 percent of those eligible for the regular legalization program (1.76 million 
applicants of an estimated 2.3 million eligible) submitted complete applications; of 
these,  just  over  1.6  million  (91  percent)  were  granted  lpr  status.  overall,  just 

2   warrens estimates gibe closely with those produced by the migration policy institute. after subtracting 
dual eligibles from the dapa numbers, mpi estimated that 3.7 million and 1.5 million would be eligible 
for dapa and expanded daca, respectively (2014).

285

immigration reform and administrative relief for 2014 and beyondfewer  than  three-quarters  of  those  estimated  to  be  eligible  received  lpr  status 
(kamasaki 2013). 

  more than 1.3 million people applied for the special agricultural worker (saw) 
program; of these, nearly 1.1 million (85 percent) were granted lpr status (ibid.).  
the total of nearly three million legalized made irca by far the most successful legalization 
program conducted by any country before 1986 or since then.3 by way of contrast, 3.2 
million persons were regularized in 27 european nations between 1996 and 2007, although 
such programs have generally fallen into disfavor in europe as a policy tool in recent years 
(kerwin, brick, and kilberg 2012).
of the applicants for the regular legalization program, about 20 percent filed applications 
through qualified designated entities (qdes), mainly nonprofit practitioners and service 
providers established by irca to serve as a buffer between the undocumented and the 
government;  the  comparable  number  for  the  saw  program  was  25  percent.  however, 
accounts from both the government and qde network sources suggest as many as half of 
those that filed applications directly with the immigration and naturalization service (ins) 
received some form of assistance from a qde, lawyer, union, or other service provider 
(meissner and papademetriou 1988; north and portz 1989).4  
the  us  catholic  conference  (uscc),  which  operated  the  largest  nonprofit  network 
of  legalization  assistance  providers,  reported  assisting  nearly  450,000  people  who 
were  potentially  eligible  for  legalization  and  ultimately  filed  about  175,000  completed 
applications. the type of assistance provided to the larger group of potential eligibles 
included outreach efforts through workshops and fairs, classroom-type sessions for group 
preparation of pre-applications, and other activities. this diversity of types of assistance, 
combined  with  variances  in  record-keeping  systems  within  usccs  decentralized 
network,  suggest  that  this  data  should  be  interpreted  with  caution.  nevertheless,  taken 
together, the evidence suggests that 50 percent or more of potential irca legalization and 
saw applicants sought some type of assistance from a nonprofit provider, and of these, 
perhaps 35 to 45 percent eventually completed an application with the original provider or 
another qde (meissner and papademetriou 1988, 61-79).5 virtually all of those who filed 

3    all of the programs implemented abroad were smaller, and most far simpler and more inclusive, than 
irca.  the  canadian  program,  implemented  more  than  a  decade  prior  to  irca,  was  a  true  amnesty, 
providing  immediate  adjustment  of  status  for  virtually  the  entire  unauthorized  population.  however,  the 
program  had  a  short,  two-month  application  window,  compared  to  ircas  12-month  application  period; 
canadas program legalized perhaps one-fifth to one-quarter of its unauthorized population (gonzalez-baker 
1990; north and portz 1989; brick 2011).
4    meissner and papademetriou reference one ins estimate to this effect; north and portz conclude about 
half of legalization applicants received some type of assistance from a nonprofit provider; they note that 
five-to-six percent of applications were filed by private attorneys.
5    reports on the program, as well as anecdotal accounts, suggest substantial forum shopping by irca 
legalization applicants, many of whom appear to have been seeking the quickest, least expensive process 
for submitting applications. the uscc created an intensive screening and review process at the programs 
outset  in  anticipation  of  a  high  burden  of  proof  and  demanding  evidentiary requirements, which  slowed 
the preparation and filing of its cases.  an internal uscc memorandum issued about one-third of the way 
through legalization acknowledged that many prospective applicants had lost patience with their program 
model, characterized by  too much caution, too many delays, too much overcrowding, too many steps, too 
much bureaucracy and thus went elsewhere.  see meissner and papademetriou 1988, 61-79.

286

journal on migration and human securityapplications through a qde received one-to-one counseling, typically over two or three 
in-person  appointments. these  figures  suggest  the  importance  of  a  robust  civil  society 
response  in  ensuring  appropriate  outreach,  service-delivery,  and  program  participation 
(even for those who ultimately self-file) in any large-scale immigrant benefit program, like 
daca, dapa, and the provisional waiver program. 
irca also advanced the registry date from june 28, 1940 to january 1, 1972. registry 
allows long-term unauthorized residentsi.e., who entered the country prior to the cut-
off date and who meet other requirementsto become lprs. more than 72,000 persons 
have legalized under this program since 1987. remarkably, congress has not advanced the 
registry date since irca, contributing to the creation of an unauthorized population that 
includes an estimated 1.9 million persons who have been in the united states for 20 years 
or more, 1.6 million for 15 to 19 years, and 3.1 million for 10 to 14 years.6 moreover, the 
average length of stay for the us unauthorized population is increasing dramatically each 
year.
every  account  of  the  period  described  both  the  government  and  nonprofits  as  being 
overwhelmed,  stretched,  and  challenged  by  the  legalization  and  saw  programs. 
other  program  shortcomings  included  an  ineffective  ins  public  education  campaign, 
controversial  eligibility  lawsuits,  and  disproportionate  application  rates  for  subgroups, 
with hispanics overrepresented and asians and africans underrepresented.
nevertheless,  the  irca  programs  legalized  nearly  three  million  people,  constituting 
almost  75  percent  of  those  eligible  for  regular  legalization.  importantly,  a  number  of 
expected problems never substantially materialized and, setting aside policy differences 
with advocates, ins generally performed at a high level during legalization. for example, 
there  are  virtually  no  credible  reports  of  ins  misusing  the  legalization  process  for 
enforcement purposes. creation of a parallel legalization infrastructure within ins was 
especially important for this oft-criticized agency whose previous public face emphasized 
enforcement.  
at the beginning of the program, many advocates feared that the $185 fee (capped at $420 
for a family of four or more)combined with fingerprinting, medical, legal, and other fees 
that could add up to $200 per applicantwould prevent many from applying. although 
practitioners noted some hardship cases, cost did not appear to be a major deterrent to 
applying,  nor  were  many  stories  of  extreme  hardship  reported.  many  predicted  severe 
problems during the second stage as temporary residents sought english/civics courses 
from  an  already overburdened adult education infrastructure.7  however,  aided by  state 
legalization  impact assistance  grants  (block  grants  included  in  irca)  the  education 
systems and legalization applicants both muddled through without significant numbers 
of temporary residents being denied access to lpr status.

6   estimates of the unauthorized population for states. center for migration studies. accessed march 9, 
2015. http://data.cmsny.org/
7   irca required applicants for permanent residence to either pass an english/civic test or be enrolled in an 
approved course.

287

immigration reform and administrative relief for 2014 and beyondgermaneness to future legalizations

there are many differences between the irca programs and the environment in which they 
took place and those announced by president obama in november 2014. technological 
changes should make the application assistance process less burdensome today than under 
irca.  for  example,  the  widespread  availability  of  information  via  the  internet  should 
ease  access  to  documentation  of  continuous  residence  and  workforce  participation, 
should facilitate increased outreach efforts, and should enable high numbers of self-filers. 
additionally, the immigrant-serving field is considerably larger, more diverse, and more 
experienced than under irca, and the extraordinary growth, development, and increasing 
sophistication of the immigrant rights community should lead to a better coordinated and 
more extensive public education, service delivery, and advocacy response to the daca, 
dapa, and provisional waiver programs, and beyond (campos 2014). 
however, potential hurdles for applicants and the immigrant rights community remain. 
high application fees, combined with low-bono attorney and nominal charitable legal 
agency fees, will constitute a substantial burden for the unauthorized, 28 percent of whom 
fall below the federal poverty line.8 a more recent point of comparison to the expanded 
daca  and  new  dapa  programs  is  the  implementation  of  the  initial  daca  program, 
discussed below.

daca experience

in august 2012, the obama administration began implementation of daca, which offers 
deferral of deportation and work authorization for unauthorized residents who: (1) arrived 
prior to age 16, are at least 15 years of age at the time of applying, and continuously resided 
in the united states since june 2007; (2) on june 15, 2012, were physically present in 
the united states, had no lawful status, and were under 31 years of age; (3) are currently 
in school, have graduated high school, or obtained a ged; and (4) have not committed 
disqualifying crimes. the formal planning period for both the department of homeland 
securitys us citizenship and immigration services (uscis) and the legal and nonprofit 
sectors  was  very  briefless  than  two  months  elapsed  between  the  programs  initial 
announcement in june of 2012 and the beginning of the application process. on november 
20,  2014,  president  obama  expanded  this  program  to  cover  a  three-year  (renewable) 
period, to remove the age limit on beneficiaries, and to move forward the required entry 
date to january 1, 2010.
daca targets a young population that has higher levels of education, english proficiency, 
and literacy relative to the unauthorized population overall. these factors, which would tend 
to facilitate daca applications, might be offset by the absence of an application period 
deadline, the ability to apply for daca as a defense against deportation, and the $465 
application fee, all of which might be disincentives to apply immediately. thus, while there 
are important differences between daca and the likely structure of broader programs like 
those contemplated in proposed reform legislation, daca provides a more contemporary 
experience than irca. analyses of the early years of dacas implementation have found:

8   estimates of the unauthorized population for states. center for migration studies. accessed march 9, 
2015. http://data.cmsny.org/

288

journal on migration and human security  through the first quarter of fiscal year 2015, uscis received a cumulative total of 
770,338 initial applications for processing, approving 638,897 and denying 38,597. 
there are a remaining 49,670 pending processing, of a total pool of eligibles estimated 
to be about one million (us citizenship and immigration services 2015).9

  when  accounting  for  children  aged  13  and  14  in  2012  who  have  since  aged  into 

eligibility, the number of immediately eligible youth increases to 1.4 million.
in addition to the 500,000 or so people eligible for daca who have not yet applied, 
about 426,000 individuals aged 15 to 30 do not yet meet the education criteria (batalova 
et al. 2014).  these not-yet-eligibles are predominantly male, and compared to daca 
eligibles overall are more than twice as likely to be limited-english-proficient, have 
higher workforce participation rates and higher poverty rates, and are three times more 
likely to be parents themselves (batalova, hooker, and capps 2013).

 

  five states had application rates of 60 percent or more for immediately eligible youth: 
arizona, texas, nevada, colorado, and north carolina; california, illinois, and new 
york  have  seen  half  of  their immediately eligible population apply  (batalova et  al. 
2014). lower-than-expected application rates in states including massachusetts, new 
jersey, virginia,  and  florida  could  be  related  to  the  demographic  make-up  of  their 
unauthorized populations. higher-than-expected application rates came from mexicans 
and central americans, who constitute 74 percent of those eligible but 86 percent of 
those who had applied as of march 2014; under-indexing states tend to have lower 
proportions of these populations.

  asians  in  particular  have  lower-than-expected  application  rates,  similar  to  what 
occurred under irca. the korean application rate stands at 24 percent, while the rate 
for chinese applicants is near zero, even though china ranks ninth among the top ten 
countries of origin for immediately eligible applicants (batalova et al. 2014). 

  longer-term  residents  (10  years  or  more)  and  those  who  were  10  years  of  age  or 
younger when they arrived are over-represented among daca applicants (singer and 
prchal svajlenka 2013). 

findings  from  one  survey  of  daca  recipients  suggest  that  the  program  contributes 
significantly to increased employment, bank and credit card access, and the availability of 
drivers licenses (gonzales and terriquez 2013). seventy percent of respondents to another 
survey noted they had been hired or moved to a new job upon receiving daca (wong 
and valdivia 2014). the role of immigrant-serving organizations in the implementation 
of daca seems substantial, as only three-in-ten daca recipients in one survey sample 
submitted their application wholly on their own. fully one-third attended a free daca 
workshop and four-in-ten paid for legal assistance (ibid.). these numbers highlight the 
need for a robust and well-resourced implementation infrastructure. 
however,  nonprofits,  unions,  and  others  assisting  daca  applicants  surveyed  by 
grantmakers concerned with immigrants and refugees (gcir) reported severe strains 
on nonprofit and legal assistance capacity involving insufficient human resources (staff 
and  volunteers);  inadequate/inconsistent  service  delivery  models  and  case  management 

9   note that initial estimates of daca eligibles in 2012subject to change as components of the population 
age in, age out, and graduate, drop out of, or enroll in secondary schoolranged from 1.089 million (batalova, 
hooker and capps 2013) to 936,000 (immigration policy center 2012) and 950,000 (passel and hugo lopez 
2012).  

289

immigration reform and administrative relief for 2014 and beyondsystems;  excessive  duplication  of  certain  key  functions  (i.e.,  producing  materials  like 
manuals and tool kits); insufficient resources for outreach (notwithstanding some effective 
partnerships with spanish media); and other concerns. despite these concerns, daca has 
both been a wake up call and a base to build on for preparations for a larger legalization 
effort. 
the  gcir  survey  also  identified  promising  innovations  emerging  from  daca 
implementation,  including  improved  online  application  assistance  systems,  promising 
micro-loan  models,  and  numerous  intra-  and  cross-sector  partnerships  that  have  the 
potential to increase the capacity to serve unauthorized persons seeking legalization. that 
said, some of these promising models have not been tested fully. overall, the immigrant 
rights  community  needs  to  devote  more  resources  and  attention  to  developing  and 
replicating successful, horizontally integrated programs, which combine public education, 
community  mobilization,  and  legal  expertise.  as  occurred  in  1986  and  in  subsequent 
smaller legalization efforts (e.g., the nicaraguan and central american relief act/abc 
settlement), the traditional immigrant-serving sector, augmented by energetic new players 
including the united we dream/own the dream networks, has demonstrated substantial 
adaptability and resilience throughout the daca process (mcgarvey 2013).
the overall resultcompletion of applications from about 60 percent of those estimated to 
be immediately eligible for dacashould be considered a highly respectable showing, 
albeit lower than under ircas legalization program (batalova et al. 2014). this positive 
assessment is specifically warranted in light of the extremely brief daca planning period, 
the service delivery and capacity challenges, the absence of any government funding for 
application assistance, and other factors limiting the governments outreach and processing 
systems. 

looking ahead

notably absent in the crush of irca implementation was any thought of steps needed to 
strengthen the immigration legal landscape afterwards (bill ong hing, charles kamasaki, 
and jack holmgren, pers. comm.). almost alone among the many groups actively engaged 
in  the  implementation  of  irca,  the  catholic  church  created  a  permanent  entitythe 
catholic  legal  immigration  network  (clinic)to  strengthen  and  expand  services  in 
the aftermath of legalization.10 clinic is now by far the largest immigrant legal service 
network in the country, with some 275 affiliates across the nation. 
given the growing demand for low-cost, high-quality immigration services, the need for a 
stronger, established infrastructure to sustain services for this population and to facilitate 
implementation  of  any  new  policies  or  programs  is  apparent.  should  comprehensive 
immigration reform legislation pass prior to a substantial build-up of the immigrant-serving 
sector, the insufficiency of the current infrastructure would become glaringly obvious. 

10   in the midst of the legalization program, clinic was created on august 18, 1988.

290

journal on migration and human securityresources needed for processing
based on historical data from past mass legalizations, one might assume that the lower 
bound of those likely to apply for dapa and expanded daca over two years might be 
about 60 percent of the estimated five million eligible, close to the daca rate over the 2012-
2014 period, resulting in approximately three million applicants. conversely, a plausible 
upper  bound  might  be  equivalent  of  ircas  75  percent  application  rate,  or  about  3.75 
million applicants. at least half of these applicants will likely require some assistance from 
a lawyer or nonprofit service provider. demographic data suggest that about 32 percent of 
these applicants need low-cost assistance. the professional judgment of the members of 
the human resources working group is that between four and eight hours of staff time 
will be required for each of these applicants. the working groups specific assumptions:

  a total of about 5 million people may be eligible for the expanded daca and the 

new dapa programs.

  between 60 percent (daca rate) and 75 percent (irca rate) of those will come 

forward and apply, the majority of whom will self-file.11

  about 40 percent of applicants will need either full or partial help from a nonprofit 

assistance provider to apply (wong and valdivia 2014, 5).12

  about 80 percent of those needing help will be low-income or need free or low-cost 

  between four and eight hours per case, on average, will be needed to aid those 

  one  full-time  equivalent  (fte)  staff  is  1,650  hours  per  year  (subtracting  other 

assistance.

seeking assistance.13

duties, holidays, and leave)

as noted above, we estimate that between 3 and 3.75 million people will likely apply for 
either  expanded  daca  or  dapa,  or  for  both.14  of  these  applicants,  between  960,000 
and 1.2 million people will need assistance of between four and eight hours of staff time 
and, due to lower incomes, cannot afford a private attorney. taking the midpoints of these 
projections, the working group believes that an estimated 1.08 million people requiring 
an average of six hours of time per case will generate a need for 6,480,000 staff hours, or 
about 3,927 full-time equivalent staff. based on those assumptions, the potential range of 
fte staff needed is listed in table 1, with the mid-point case highlighted.

11   some self-filers will obtain private counsel. others may avail themselves of certain resources produced or 
provided by the government and nonprofits, but will not receive extensive application assistance.
12   about half of irca applicants received some assistance from a nonprofit. one recent survey concluded 
that only 30% of respondents submitted their daca application on their own. however, wongs definition 
of self-filers appears to exclude an applicant who attends an informational workshop or clinic and then files 
without additional assistance. by contrast, unless that applicant went on to seek additional assistance, s/he 
would be included in the working groups definition of self-filer.
13    some  expert  commentators  question  the  average  cost  per  case  approach,  noting  that  for  some 
populations,  such  as  farmworkers,  cases  are  not  distributed  evenly  along  a  continuum  but  tend  to  skew 
heavily toward more difficult ones (kissam and intili 2014). 
14   some observers predict fewer applications than we do under the expanded daca and dapa programs. 
the congressional budget office, for example, recently estimated that 150,000 and 1.5 million would apply 
for expanded daca and dapa, respectivelyabout a 50 percent application ratethrough the end of fy 
2017 (2015). 

291

immigration reform and administrative relief for 2014 and beyondtable 1. number of full-time equivalent staff needed
8 hours/applicant
applicants assisted
960,000
4,655
5,236
1,080,000
1,200,000
5,818

4 hours/applicant
2,327
2,618
2,909

6 hours/applicant
3,491
3,927
4,364

the kinds of activities these staff will be engaged in are described in further detail in the 
following sections.

types of work required

public education/fraud prevention

the combination of lack of status and need to provide for their families make undocumented 
immigrants especially vulnerable to being taken advantage of by those who engage in the 
unauthorized practice of law (notarios). when the senate introduced the border security, 
economic  opportunity,  and  immigration  modernization  act  (s.  744),  many  notarios 
immediately  began  falsely  promising  those  without  status  that  for  a  small  fee,  they 
would ensure those individuals were put in the front of the line when immigration reform 
passed, and would receive status right away. when the bill passed in the senate in june 
2013, many immigrants thought that it had become law, and went straight to their local 
notarios to apply for status. 
to  prevent  this  vulnerable  community  from  falling  victim  to  scams  by  notarios  or 
experiencing  difficulty  in  the  application  process  due  to  misinformation,  it  is  essential 
that community organizations have the resources to provide education to the immigrant 
community  on  multiple  levels.  accurate  information  on  individual  eligibility  and  the 
application process should be legally sound,  easily understood, culturally relevant, and 
linguistically diverse. 
members  of  the  committee  for  immigration  reform  implementation  have  prepared 
materials  for  both  service  providers  and  applicants  (such  as  resource  guides,  charts, 
check  lists,  notices  and  warnings  against  notario  fraud),  translated  such  materials  into 
other  languages,  delivered  webinars  and  in-person  community-based  presentations  to 
disseminate the information, and other activities, many of which can be found at the ciri 
website (www.adminrelief.org). 

outreach, screening, application, and ancillary services

through town hall and community meetings, ethnic radio and newspapers, individuals can 
receive quality information from trusted sources on the status of immigration reform. mass 
education before and after program or policy change is important to ensure that individuals 

292

journal on migration and human securityreceive accurate information regarding when they can apply for status, what documentation 
they need, and best practices for applying.
to  properly  assist  the  five  million-plus  individuals  who  qualify  for  daca,  dapa, 
provisional  waivers  filed  on  form  i-601a,  or  another  form  of  relief,  community 
organizations must have the ability to screen individuals for eligibility, assist them with 
application  completion,  provide  case  management,  and  facilitate  the  maintenance  of 
eligibility. in addition, ancillary services potentially required by the population include 
tax  preparation  for  initial  application,  renewal  and  adjustment,  assistance  for  securing 
records from prior contact with law enforcement or the immigration agency, job training 
and placement to show continuous employment for renewal and eventual adjustment to 
lawful permanent residency, and english-as-a-second language classes to show english 
proficiency when eventually applying for citizenship.
a complex and multi-layered array of legal and non-legal service needs requires large-
scale, multi-purpose immigration assistance networks within communities. legal service 
providers and community agencies must be organized and in communication to provide 
quality  services  to  immigrants  seeking  status.  initial  screenings  may  be  done  in  large 
settings to determine who is eligible to apply for status. from there, it may be possible for 
volunteers or paralegals to assist with straightforward cases, but those with complicated 
cases will likely require referral to low-cost attorneys or bia-accredited representatives. 
a substantial percentage of the unauthorized potentially qualifies for lpr status, but may 
be unaware of their eligibility, and a thorough legal screening is necessary in these cases 
(wong et al. 2014). in the standard legal service model, once the application is submitted, 
organizations must manage each case to ensure that the clients are given the correct referrals 
to afford themselves other remedies or to stay eligible for renewal of status. 
the above-described standard case management model would require staff investments 
toward the upper range of the working groups estimated four to eight hours per case. for a 
very large program including expanded daca and dapa, however, it is likely that more 
truncated but still valid models will be deployed that would result in staff investments 
closer to the lower end of the range.15 regardless of the specific model(s) employed, the 
basic processing of mass numbers of individuals for administrative relief typically requires 
coordinated efforts of legal service providers, volunteers, community-based organizations 
and  multiple  service  providers,  many  of  whom  have  not  worked  together  previously. 
all of the players within this immigration assistance network are essential to ensure that 
individuals receive quality services and obtain the most substantial form of relief available. 

current capacity
the  immigration advocates  networks  (ians)  national  immigration  service  provider 
directory  shows  that  across  the  united  states,  there  are  1,020  nonprofit  organizations 
providing  immigration  legal  services.  those  organizations  employ  2,018  attorneys  and 
many fully and partially board of immigration appeals accredited representatives. the 

15   so-called assisted pro se filers may receive some help from, but will not be formally represented by, 
legal service and other organizations.

293

immigration reform and administrative relief for 2014 and beyondbia  roster  of  recognized  organization  lists  852  service  providers,  many  of  which  are 
included in ians directory (bia 2015). the board lists 1,393 accredited representatives at 
present (ibid.). additionally, ians directory lists 1,276 paralegals or other legal workers 
who are not accredited, but who can contribute to this work. therefore, the total number of 
legal staff from charitable legal service programs that are available to participate at some 
level in work related to administrative relief is 4,687 (ian 2015).
assuming that one full-time employee works 1,650 hours per year and assuming that these 
workers will be able to spend 25 percent of their time on any new immigration initiative, 
current nonprofit legal services providers will be able to provide at best 1,933,387 hours 
towards  the  new  administrative  relief  programs,  or  the  equivalent  of  1,172  full-time 
employees. if 100 percent of this shifted capacity were available, it would be equivalent 
to over seven million hours, about enough to process a small scale administrative relief 
program the size of daca, or a potential applicant pool of 1.25 million people. however, 
these agencies already accommodate very demanding caseloads and will need an infusion 
of funding and staffing, particularly at the outset of these programs, in order to maximize 
their work on expanded daca and dapa. there is thus a pressing need for upfront 
funding  as  early  in  the  program  as  possible  for  outreach,  public  education,  combating 
notario fraud, advocacy, and assistance to self-filers, which are generally not covered by 
the cost estimates that follow. without additional funding and staff, agencies will likely not 
be able to shift 25 percent of staff time to accommodate any new program.
in sum, the current available capacity of the field is a under 1,200 full-time equivalent staff, 
while more than three times that number will be required to serve those eligible for the 
expanded daca and the dapa programs. 

law school immigration clinics

one way to increase legal capacity is to expand the use of law school immigration clinics, 
as occurred during irca and to a lesser extent under daca. law students supervised 
by professors can play a significant role in providing legal services to potentially eligible 
administrative relief applicants through community education, direct representation, and 
collaboration with nonprofit immigration service providers.
there are over 200 legal immigration clinics in the united states, far more than during 
irca (anjum gupta, pers. comm.). the focus of these immigration clinics varies. the 
majority of clinics provide legal representation to a limited number of clients, often limiting 
their caseload to specific types of immigration cases, such as asylum, special immigrant 
juvenile cases, or survivors of domestic violence. other clinics engage in activities that 
involve client representation through models distinct from direct client casework such as 
impact litigation with an advocacy or larger policy focus. the capacity of clinics is limited 
by a variety of factors, including the availability of credits, prescribed institutional goals, 
and both student and professor time constraints. 
nonetheless,  law  school  clinics  can  provide  a  variety  of  services  to  deliver  and/or 
supplement administrative relief efforts. responses from these clinics to a recent survey 
initiated  by  the  law  school  affinity  group  demonstrate  significant  interest  in  a  variety 

294

journal on migration and human securityof  administrative  relief  activities  including  direct  representation,  participation  in  group 
processing workshops, development of best legal practices, know your rights and how-
to guides, community education and outreach, website development and data collection. 
the working group is confident that as implementation of administrative relief begins, 
more law school programs will collaborate to provide legal services to eligible applicants.16
one significant challenge to collaboration with law clinics and integration of law students 
is the coordination required to match clinics and law students with non-profit organizations 
that have direct contact with potential clients. an optimal solution might be to procure 
funding for a staff person at one or more national service providers to serve as a liaison to 
law schools to maximize legal services for administrative relief. an alternative model is 
to use regional or state-based leaders from established nonprofits or law school clinics and 
pro bono programs. in fact, in response to the affinity groups survey, some clinic programs 
have already volunteered to serve as coordinators.

the private immigration bar and pro bono attorneys

the american immigration lawyers association (aila) is the national bar association 
of more than 14,000 immigration attorneys throughout the country. aila is represented 
within ciri and is an important partner when considering the ability of nonprofit legal 
service providers to leverage their own limited resources. time and again, aila members 
have played a significant role in the provision of legal services, including low-cost and pro 
bono services. during the prior legalization and in response to more recent pro bono crises, 
aila members have answered the call to fill the legal services needs gap. in particular, 
aila and the national immigration project of the national lawyers guild have played 
critical roles in addressing specialized issues, such as appeals of denied applications during 
irca and assisting applicants potentially affected by criminal exclusions under daca. 
that said, most attorneys will not be able to provide exclusively pro bono and low bono 
services to administrative relief applicants; according to north and portz (1989), about five 
percent of irca applicants, for example, hired private counsel.
another source of assistance that should be considered is the private non-immigration bar. 
recent opportunities for pro bono collaboration have shown that large law firms that can 
provide personnel and resources may have a role to play in any upcoming administrative 
relief effort, although many already are highly invested in addressing the recent increases 
in unaccompanied minors from central america. despite expressed interest, the level of 
such  resources  can  be  extremely  difficult  to  quantify  before  specific  commitments  are 
made and aggregated.

16   one of the exemplary law school clinics known to the working group is the depaul university college 
of laws asylum and immigration clinic in chicago, illinois, which supports some 26 community-based 
organizations that provide immigration services. the university of texas school of law sponsored more 
than  a  dozen  daca  workshop  sessions  around  the  state,  with  a  special  emphasis  on  areas  with  modest 
nonprofit capacity such as the lower rio grande valley.

295

immigration reform and administrative relief for 2014 and beyondnascent capacity

nascent capacity can be found in agencies that, on the basis of their mission, client caseload, 
constituency, geographic service area, or any combination thereof, may be predisposed to 
adding immigration legal services to their cadre of offerings, or assisting in coordinated 
programs by providing necessary non-legal services. although these organizations may not 
currently provide legal services to immigrants, they may be able to play a unique role in 
increasing capacity for administrative relief.
potential  sources  of  implementation  support  services  include  religious  institutions. 
churches provide safe and trusted locations for immigrants to receive legal information 
and  services,  enabling  them  to  perform  supporting  roles  for  the  work  of  immigration 
attorneys and accredited representatives, provided they receive appropriate training and 
technical assistance. recently, a coalition of 15 evangelical church-based organizations 
that  represent  more  than  28,500  churches  in  the  united  states  came  together  with  the 
goal of rapidly increasing the number of churches that are recognized and accredited to 
provide immigration legal services; the immigration alliance is committed to dramatically 
multiplying  the  number  of  sites  across  the  country  providing  low-cost,  high-quality 
immigrant legal services over the next three years.17 
the catholic network of programs is illustrative of how dramatically the concept of nascent 
capacity  can  impact  the  provision  of  services.   thirty  percent  of  the  clinic  network 
is  other  than  catholic;  many  of  these  organizations  do  not  self-identify  principally  as 
immigration providers, but as:

libraries; 
 
 
job training/workforce development programs;
  domestic violence shelters/treatment programs; 
  english language programs; 
  african- and caribbean-led programs;
 
  parish- and faith unit-based charitable organizations and ethnic ministries;
 
  dreamer and other student groups. 

family resource centers; and

labor unions;

their  participation  in  the  clinic  network  demonstrates  how  these  and  other  kinds  of 
agencies could be further developed to expand capacity for implementation of dapa and 
expanded daca.
one notable example of rapid development of nascent capacity is the network of domestic 
violence treatment programs providing immigration assistance. in the space of a decade, 
this sector has grown to more than 50 sites throughout the country, with an emphasis on 
rural communities lacking traditional immigration legal services capacity. this capacity 
was grown through a single grant from the federal government of $500,000. the funding 
primarily  supported  robust  immigration  law  training  and  technical  assistance  for  small 
programs that sought recognition and accreditation from the board of immigration appeals 
in order to legally provide immigration services. and, as noted earlier, the largely volunteer-

17   see: www.theimmigrationalliance.org.

296

journal on migration and human securitydriven united we dream/own the dream network was able to build significant applicant 
assistance capacity for the initial daca implementation in a brief period of time.
other  networks  offer  similar  opportunities.  many  in  the  pro-immigrant  organizing  and 
advocacy  community,  including  members  of  the  fair  immigration  reform  movement 
(firm) and the pico national network, are establishing new programs to serve those 
within  their  constituencies  that  may  be  eligible  for  administrative  relief.  similarly,  the 
national partnership for new americans, regional organizations supported by the center 
for popular democracy, and local affiliates of the national council of la raza and the 
service employees international union are all planning to expand existing and/or establish 
new capacity for dapa and expanded daca implementation. these networks are already 
deeply  embedded  in  immigrant  communities,  are  fully  culturally-competent,  and  many 
have developed innovative program models in related fields, including enrollment in health 
care and other benefit programs, applying for drivers licenses, and in the naturalization 
process.
nurturing,  expanding,  strengthening,  and  promoting  the  sustainability  of  this  nascent 
capacity  is  a  crucial  element  of  any  viable  strategy  for  assuring  sufficient  application 
assistance for expanded dada and dapa implementation.

funding

fee-for-service programs

fee-for-service or earned income programs have been around for a long time and client 
fees account for roughly one-third of immigration legal services funding within the clinic 
network.18 fees for service, combined with multiple other sources of support, account for 
the close to 100 percent sustainability record of the clinic network programs and much 
of the rest of the non-profit immigration field.19 clinic has advocated for the need to 
charge fees since the ford foundation funded the creation of immigration management: 
building blocks for a successful program and the accompanying immigration program 
management trainings in the mid-1990s.
what does this mean in terms of gross income for the clinic network? according to the 
annual survey of clinic network programs done by the center for applied research in 
the apostolate (cara), it amounted to $12,856,396 for the 142 affiliates that completed 
that section of the survey in 2013. if the balance of programs that did not report this are 
assumed to have made even half as much in fee revenue then the total would be $17,881,263.
in a field without significant government support, the fee-for-service program is the most 
important source of income and often the only source of unrestricted funding. in a sense, 

18   as  of  the  end  of  september  2014,  the  clinic  network  consisted  of  over  275  affiliates.  more  than 
30 percent of these charitable legal programs for immigrants are other than catholic, so that this network 
represents a broad spectrum of the field.
19   the working group recognizes that coordination between various service providers might lead to tension 
regarding  funding  sources,  with  pro  bono  attorneys  wary  of  fees  and  one-on-one  organizational  service 
providers relying on fees for institutional sustainability.

297

immigration reform and administrative relief for 2014 and beyondthe  ability  to  generate  fees  will  determine  the  level  of  participation  by  these  agencies 
in  daca  and  dapa,  and  the  expansion  of  these  programs  to  accommodate  eventual 
legislative reform. a well-run program will generate a consistent fee revenue stream for 
years,  as  well  as  more  responsive  and  empowered  clients.  by  contrast,  programs  that 
depend exclusively on the scant grant funding available for direct services are generally not 
sustainable. as the daca experience shows, fee-for-service programs require intentional 
development. some in the daca service and applicant community were adamant about 
not charging/paying even nominal fees for those services. as a result, many of the services 
were transitory and lacked the financial support to be sustainable. the irony is that, but for 
the fields commitment to fee-for-service programs before daca, there would have been 
little capacity to accommodate these applicants during daca implementation.
although an infusion of funding to hire staff is necessary at the outset of these programs, 
and in most cases some ongoing subsidy is required, fee-for-service programs can both 
reduce the need for ongoing outside funding and ensure some degree of sustainability over 
the long term. one simple fee-based model illustrates the point; assuming a single staffer:

 
completes 1.33 applications per day (6 hours per application); 
  has 206.25 productive work days in a year (1,650 hours); and
 

charges a $200 agency service fee per application.20

under this scenario, a single staffer could be at least partially self-supporting, producing 
over $50,000 of fee income per year (calculation: 1.33 x 206 x $200 = $54,863 of fee 
income generated per year, per staffer). 
bia-recognized  groups  may  only  charge  nominal  fees,  and  most  effective  programs 
have other sources of funding. nevertheless, the working group strongly believes that 
every effort should be made to make fee-for-service programs the norm in order to build 
capacity that is sustainable over the long term. 

costs and gaps
the  next  question  involves  determining  the  dollar  costs  required  to  employ  the  staff 
required for effective implementation of dapa and expanded daca. as it is difficult to 
anticipate exact staff compensation across an extremely diverse field, and since the total 
ftes  required  likely  will  consist  of  various  combinations  of  lawyers,  bia-accredited 
representatives, and other professional staff, paraprofessionals, volunteers, students, pro 
bono attorneys, and other non- or lower-paid assisters, there is great variation in the amount 
of funding that might be required to cover staff costs. 
calculations of cost for each combination of low, mid, and high application levels, various 
per-applicant staff time estimates, and different salary amounts are listed in tables 2a-2c, 
below, with the mid-point estimates highlighted in table 2b.

20   informal surveys conducted by clinic gave an average charge per daca application of $200 (mainly 
for one-on-one service) for the initial application. an informal survey of one workshop at the ready america 
conference in february 2015 produced an average daca application assistance charge of $190.

298

journal on migration and human securitytable 2a. 960,000 applicants assisted
cost/fte employee 4 hours/applicant
$50,000 
$75,000 
$100,000 

6 hours/applicant
$174,545,455
$261,818,182
$349,090,909

$116,363,636
$174,545,455
$232,727,273

8 hours/applicant
$232,727,273
$349,090,909
$465,454,545

table 2b. 1,080,000 applicants assisted
cost/fte employee 4 hours/applicant
6 hours/applicant
$196,363,636
$50,000 
$294,545,455
$75,000 
$100,000 
$392,727,273

$130,909,091
$196,363,636
$261,818,182

8 hours/applicant
$261,818,182
$392,727,273
$523,636,364

table 2c. 1,200,000 applicants assisted
6 hours/applicant
cost/fte employee 4 hours/applicant
$218,181,818
$50,000 
$75,000 
$327,272,727
$436,363,636
$100,000 

$145,454,545
$218,181,818
$290,909,091

8 hours/applicant
$290,909,091
$436,363,636
$581,818,182

however, these overall expense calculations do not account for the offsetting of costs with 
various fee-for-service models. the potential income generated by fee-for-service programs 
calculated at different fee levels are presented in table 3, with the working groups best 
estimate highlighted:

table 3. revenue generated by fee-for-service
fee

applicants assisted

960,000
$96,000,000
$144,000,000
$192,000,000

$100
$150 
$200 

1,080,000
$108,000,000
$162,000,000
$216,000,000

1,200,000
$120,000,000
$180,000,000
$240,000,000

while potential revenues from fee-for-service appear to greatly offset the cost of full-time 
equivalent employees, as noted previously, many applicants will be unable to pay a fee 
upwards of $150, especially given a government application fee of $480 and the likelihood 
that some lower-income households will have multiple applicants. assuming the average 
fee-for-service is $150, and the median assumption for the number of applicants needing 

299

immigration reform and administrative relief for 2014 and beyondassistance proves accurate, the difference or gap between fee revenue and staff cost, at 
varying levels of staff cost, are outlined in table 4. the working groups best estimates of 
this gap are highlighted:

table 4. cost differential for 1,080,000 applicants assisted 
with a $150 fee
cost/fte employee
$50,000
$75,000 
$100,000 

8 hours/applicant
$99,818,182 
$230,727,273 
$361,636,364 

6 hours/applicant
$34,363,636 
$132,545,455 
$230,727,273 

4 hours/applicant
-$31,090,909 23
$34,363,636 
$99,818,182 

the working group believes that some amount between the lower and mid-point estimates 
in table 4 of $34 million and $132 million, or about $83 million, net after collection of fees, 
is as reasonable an estimate as any for the potential nonprofit sector funding gap required 
to assure effective application assistance services to the eligible low-income people likely 
to apply for the expanded daca and dapa programs. on the one hand, this gap could be 
reduced by any number of factors, including: 21

 

 

 

improved efficiencies, such as the expanded use of technology to reduce application 
assistance costs and/or to assist self-filers;
increased  nonfinancial  government  support,  potentially  including  access  to 
subsidized americorps, vista and retired senior volunteer program resources;
expanded  private  philanthropy, 
corporations, and individuals; and

including  contributions  from  foundations, 

  higher fees charged/collected.

moreover, wise front-loaded investments can help to maximize coordination and minimize 
duplication,  ensure  education  and  outreach  to  empower  self-filers,  assist  applicants  to 
prepare by collecting documents beforehand, and channel applicants to the most appropriate 
sources of assistance, thus minimizing confusion, forum shopping, and the vulnerability of 
the population to fraud. 
on the other hand, it is also true that some other factors could exacerbate the gap, including:
  protracted  litigation  or  legislative  battles  that  complicate  the  program  itself  and 

confuse applicants;

  unreasonable or overly restrictive documentation or application requirements, or 
 

slow adjudications that could increase per-applicant staff time required and/or raise 
doubts about the efficacy of the program;

21  the working group does not believe this number is plausible; it essentially assumes that virtually all 
daca and dapa applicants can/will be assisted through mass-processing models staffed almost exclusively 
by  para-professionals  and  volunteers,  regardless  of  whether  they  are  eligible  for  other  remedies  or  have 
difficult cases.

300

journal on migration and human security 
 

insufficient support from private philanthropy; and
insufficient fee revenue.

beyond the actual advocacy or litigation resources required, these and other factors could 
force service providers to invest more heavily in outreach and education, reducing resources 
for application assistance itself. finally, it should be noted that all of these estimates are 
highly sensitive to even modest changes in assumptions and should be treated with caution.

conclusion
the prospect of facilitating lawful, albeit temporary, status for as many as five million 
people  presents  formidable  challenges  to  the  nonprofit  legal  assistance  field  and  will 
require substantial support from the nonprofit sector itself and private philanthropy, as this 
analysis shows. but these costs are far outweighed by the benefits, not just to the daca/
dapa population but especially to the society at large.
on the cost side of the equation, as with all other immigration services, such as applications 
for visas to enter the country and naturalization, all of the governments expenses required 
to operate the daca/dapa programs will be covered by user fees paid by the applicants 
themselves. in addition, this analysis suggests that between two-thirds and three-quarters 
of the cost of the application assistance infrastructure required will be borne by daca/
dapa applicants, with the balance provided by the private nonprofit and philanthropic 
sectors, which is not to say that a majority of the total income of charitable immigration 
programs engaged in this work will come from fees-for-service.
that a substantial portion of this relatively low-income population will probably be willing 
to  absorb  such  costs  attests to  the  obvious  benefits  afforded  by  deferred  actionbeing 
able to live and work without the constant threat of deportation and family separation. 
numerous  studies  have  shown  that  those  moving  from  unauthorized  to  lawful  status 
will also experience greater economic opportunity, since they will be far less vulnerable 
to exploitation in the labor market. moreover, the gains to participants in a broad-scale 
legalization program like deferred action are far exceeded by the economic benefits to the 
country as a whole. recently the center for american progress (mathema 2015) calculated 
some of the economic gains over the next 10 years from providing deferred action to the 
daca- and dapa-eligible population, which include:

  wage increases to daca and dapa recipients of $103 billion;
 
 
 
 

a cumulative increase in the gross domestic product of $230 billion;
income increases for all americans of $124 billion;
creation of more than 288,000 new jobs for all americans; and
tax revenue increases of an additional $41 billion to the social security system.

the prospect of accruing such enormous societal benefits at literally no cost to the taxpayer 
represents a rare opportunity for us society. fully realizing these benefits, however, will 
require a significant and intentional investment in building and sustaining the infrastructure 
needed to maximize participation in deferred action. 

301

immigration reform and administrative relief for 2014 and beyondas detailed in this report, effective implementation of expanded daca and dapa will 
indisputably require a substantial expansion of the capacity of the nonprofit legal services 
and immigrant-serving sectors. significantly, there is no risk that a substantial commitment 
to building capacity will prove wasteful, for even if one assumes that implementation of 
expanded daca and dapa may be considerably delayed, currently existing needs more 
than justify a large expansion of relevant sector capacity. demand for services still far 
exceeds supply. even assuming that pre-daca supply of and demand for legal services to 
assist lower-income immigrants was at equilibrium, there is a need for immediate additional 
capacity to assist at least three discrete groups:

 

 

 

the over 560,000 people initially eligible for daca that have yet to apply (batalova 
et al. 2014, 1);22
the over 400,000 individuals who would be eligible for daca but have not met the 
education requirement (ibid.); and
the  substantial  percentage  of  the  unauthorized  population  who  may  be  eligible 
for other forms of relief, which for the purpose of this article we conservatively 
estimate to be in the range of one million, although this number may in fact be 
much higher.23

applying the same methodology used above for expanded daca/dapa populations to 
this potential applicant pool, using the mid-point estimates, produces the following results:

  total potential applicants:
  total requiring assistance:
  total ftes needed at 6 hrs/case:        
  total cost at $75k/fte:
  less fees at $150/case:

~ 2 million
640,000
2,327
$175 million
($96 million)

perhaps the first step toward building a nonprofit infrastructure commensurate with future 
needs is the realization that the existing infrastructure is insufficient to meet current needs. 
in all events, this insufficiency comes at a cost to american society, a cost that in the future 
may be multiplied many times over, if we do not begin planning now to build and sustain 
an infrastructure with an expanded capacity to reap the many benefits of a broad-scale 
legalization program. 

22   batalova  et al. (2014) estimated that 1.2 million were immediately eligible for daca. an estimated 
2.1 million individuals are currently or potentially eligible for daca, including those who will age-in over 
the coming years and those who would be eligible otherwise, but who do not currently meet the education 
requirement.  subtracting  the  total  number  of  those  who  have  been  approved  for  daca  (638,897)  from 
the potentially eligible pool indicates there are almost 1.4 million who might need assistance with daca 
applications, with over 560,000 immediately eligible.
23    wong  et.  al.  found  that  14.3  percent  of  individuals  eligible  for  daca  were  also  eligible  for  some 
other immigration benefit or form of relief. they also found potential eligibility rates were far higher for 
unauthorized persons screened by charitable immigration programs during normal office intake and screening 
procedures (i.e., not during daca screening). 

302

journal on migration and human security