california dreaming: the new 
dynamism in immigration 
federalism and opportunities 
for inclusion on a variegated 
landscape1

roberto suro
university of southern california

executive summary
interactions  between  local,  state  and  federal  governments  as  regards 
immigration policies began to undergo a dramatic change with the passage 
of proposition 187 in california in 1994. seemingly settled issues over the 
relative prerogatives of different levels of government and even different 
branches of government have since been the subject of frequent contention 
in many venues and in many domains of immigration policy. during this 
period, especially in the last decade, a new dynamism has developed in 
immigration federalism that is evident in both policymaking processes and 
policy outcomes. 
in policy processes, this dynamism is characterized by an increasingly broad 
distribution of powers and responsibilities across all levels of government. as 
a result, an ever-broader array of actors has gained a say over immigration 
policies.  these  include  not  only  elected  office  holders  and  government 
officials but also advocates and activists from many sectors of civil society 
including immigrant communities themselves. finally, the different levels 
of  government  and  policy  actors  do  not  operate  in  isolation  but  rather 
in vigorous interaction across multiple levels of government and among 
advocates of different sorts both in the formulation and implementation of 
policy. this new dynamism is reflected in recent scholarship that describes 
models of federalism based on discourse, intermediation and collaboration 
among  governments  rather  than  resting  primarily  on  the  longstanding 
constitutional arguments over the balance of power between the states and 
the federal government. 
the policy outcomes produced by this new dynamism are marked by highly 
divergent and varied results. the federal government devolved some powers 
over welfare and policing policies regarding immigrants, but implementation 

1   this study was made possible through the support of the john d. and catherine t. macarthur foundation.

 2015 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 3 number 1 (2015): 1-25by state and local governments was largely dictated by local factors rather 
than washingtons intent. meanwhile, many sub-federal governments have 
taken the initiative to assume powers on immigration matters. in some 
cases they have mitigated the punitive effects of being unauthorized under 
federal rules and have created pathways of civic inclusion for immigrants 
who otherwise suffer isolation from the body politic. taking the opposite 
approach,  other  jurisdictions  have  adopted  enforcement  regimes  meant 
to  heighten  the  impact  of  federal  exclusion.  in  effect,  washington  still 
exercises exclusive power to determine an individuals immigration status, 
but many state and local governments have enacted policies that define the 
practical consequences of that status. 
the paper concludes by positing the likelihood of heightened differentiation 
on immigration policy on a state and local basis, particularly if washington 
remains unable to enact a new policy regime in this area. instead of a single, 
dominant  federal  policy,  many  state  and  local  jurisdictions  will  create 
policies that condition the immigrant experience sufficiently to influence the 
size and content of migration flows.  across a highly variegated landscape 
of  immigration  policies,  some  places  will  be  welcoming  while  others 
will be inhospitable, even hostile, to newcomers. this new dynamism in 
immigration federalism and the resulting variety of outcomes are products 
of  large,  deeply  rooted  trends  in  american  society  that  are  unlikely  to 
change in the foreseeable future. 

introduction: two messages from california
twenty months after taking office as president of mexico, enrique pea nieto made his 
first official visit to the united states, but his destination in august 2014 was california 
not washington, dc, and his first major event was not conducted in english.  rather, he 
addressed a roaring crowd of activists, advocates and businesspeople, representing the 1.7 
million mexican-born immigrants living in metropolitan los angeles, one out of every 
seven residents in the area. in the ballroom of the biltmore hotel on pershing square, once 
the castle keep of the los angeles establishment, pea nieto extolled his audience as el 
otro mxico, the other mexico (sandoval 2014).
a day later pea nieto addressed a legislative body in the united states for the first time, 
and it was the california legislature, not the us congress. he noted, its no coincidence 
that my first visit to the united states is in california (bernstein 2014). the mexican 
president then praised the california lawmakers for taking a number of steps to improve 
the condition of unauthorized migrants in the absence of action by the federal government.  
specifically praising a california law to grant drivers licenses regardless of immigration 
status, pea nieto said, the progress you have promoted not only benefits californians 
because you have sent a very clear message to the us and the entire world (nirappil 
2014).
just 20 years earlier california loudly broadcast a far different message on immigration. 

2

journal on migration and human securityvoters  enacted  an  initiative,  proposition  187,  in  1994  that  would  have  denied  a  wide 
range of social, health and education benefits to unauthorized migrants had it not been 
blocked by a federal court. californians that year also reelected a governor, pete wilson, 
who broadcast an infamous television commercial which featured menacing grainy black 
and white pictures of migrants dashing through a border crossing near san diego. they 
keep coming, the announcer intoned, two million illegal immigrants in california. the 
federal government wont stop them at the border yet requires us to spend millions to take 
care of them.2 in 1994, the california message blamed failed federal policies for leaving 
the state no choice but to act on its own to rid itself of unwanted illegal aliens before they 
broke the state budget with their abuse of benefits (suro 1999). 
in 2014, californias message again began with a claim of federal failure but to an opposite 
effect. upon signing a package of bills that buffered unauthorized immigrants from federal 
immigration enforcement and extended a variety of privileges to them including the ability 
to  practice  law,  governor  edmund  g.  brown  jr.  said,  while  washington  waffles  on 
immigration, california is forging ahead. im not waiting (govnews.ca 2013). this time, 
however, washington was being faulted for being insufficiently inclusive versus the 1994 
claim of failure to exclude. and, californias message included profitable ties with mexico 
and the creation of welcoming civic spaces for mexican migrants regardless of their status 
under federal law. 

between then and now
the distance between california in 1994 and 2014 marks a period of rapid evolution in 
immigration federalism. during that time battles over the balance of power between the 
states  and  the  federal  government,  particularly  those  provoked  by arizonas  claim  on 
enforcement authority, rightfully captured much attention in the news media, in political 
debates,  and  in  scholarship.  without  diminishing  the  significance  of  those  battles, 
however, this paper is focused elsewhere. rather than portraying two sovereigns locked 
in  a  constitutional  duel,  this  paper  explores  evidence  of  expanding  interrelationships 
among federal, state and local governments on immigration matters. through competition, 
collaboration and happenstance, both the making and the implementation of immigration 
policy has spread across all levels of government during this period. diverse formulas of 
immigration federalism have arisen and with them diverse policy outcomes. taken together, 
these developments suggest the emergence of a new dynamism in immigration federalism. 
looking to the formulation of policy reveals that lines of influence are operating in both 
directions  in  and  out  of  washington.  using  laws,  ballot  box  initiatives  and  litigation, 
various sub-federal actors have set out to pressure federal policymakers, sometimes with 
notable success. in other cases washington has deliberately devolved authority to the states 
over matters related to immigrants or has chosen not to interfere with local initiatives.  
these kinds of interchanges have become typical for a number of domestic issues such as 
education and health care that increasingly involve bureaucracies, budgets, policies and 
politics that arc across all levels of government. immigration policy was once a bastion 

2    pete  wison  1994  campaign  ad  on  illegal  immigration  viewable  at:  https://www.youtube.com/

watch?v=llizzs2hhgy.

3

california dreaming: the new dynamism in immigration federalismof federal prerogatives because it related to borders, citizenship and foreign policy. but 
as issues related to matters like social services and law enforcement have moved to the 
foreground, federal preeminence has diminished.
in terms of policy outcomes, washington alone can decide who gets into the country and 
under what circumstances. but, the enduring presence of a large unauthorized population 
suggests that authority is somewhat more hypothetical than real. meanwhile, after four 
decades of substantial immigration flows, the foreign-born population is not only large but 
also well settled, and the integration of immigrants has become a policy concern in some 
ways broader and more contentious than the regulation of entry (suro 1994b). integration 
raises challenges for all levels of governments and the responses have been highly varied. 
in some places the interaction between state and federal agencies enhances federal policies 
that have an exclusionary intent, particularly as regards enforcement against unauthorized 
immigrants or limiting access to public services for legal immigrants. elsewhere, the new 
federalism produces policies that mitigate exclusionary policies and create pathways for 
inclusion even for those considered out-of-status by federal rules. some states offer drivers 
licenses to unauthorized immigrants while others require their contractors to verify the 
legal status of all employees. some law enforcement agencies prohibit officers from asking 
about immigration status; others require it. washington alone can determine immigration 
status, but increasingly state and local governments are shaping the practical consequences 
of status. 
at the start of the 1990s, the context of immigrant settlement varied greatly across the 
country,  but  it  was  determined  primarily  by  economic,  social  and  demographic  factors 
at the local level (portes and rumbaut 1990). public policy was generally uniform under 
federal rules and state and local governments were largely silent on immigrants. then, 
as daniel j. tichenor puts it, all this seemed to change in the mid-1990s, as california 
politics became consumed by efforts to limit public benefits for aliens and a new set of 
congressional reformers pressed for sharp restrictions of immigrant admissions and rights 
(2002). some scholars depict this period as the beginning of a new nativism (jacobson 
2008). others describe the passage of proposition 187 as signaling the dawn of a new 
era of sub-federal activism, demanding that washington toughen immigration enforcement 
or make good on alleged budgetary burdens caused by unauthorized migration (filindra 
2009). 
yet even as new relations between washington and the states unfolded over policies of 
exclusion, other developments were underway. this paper demonstrates that in the past 
decade in particular the new dynamism of immigration federalism has also created spaces 
for welcoming policies undertaken by state and local governments. policies emerging from 
the new federalism can create the conditions for engagement between newcomers and local 
institutions that would not exist otherwise. cumulatively, that engagement can produce a 
new degree of inclusion in civil society, particularly for unauthorized immigrants. 
the paper is divided into three major sections. the first reviews the policy developments 
that have produced the new dynamism in state-federal interactions over immigration. the 
next assesses how scholars have interpreted the potential for new forms of immigration 
federalism. the  last  section  describes  sub-federal  initiatives  that  aim  at  mitigation  and 
inclusion for unauthorized immigrants. 

4

journal on migration and human securitythe  1996  legislation  and  the  development  of  a  new 
immigration federalism
at a press conference the day after 4.6 million californians voted to deny public benefits 
to unauthorized immigrants in november 1994, governor wilson called proposition 187, 
the two-by-four we need to make them take notice in washington (suro 1994a). although 
litigation begun that same day prevented any element of the ballot measure from ever being 
implemented, over time it did indeed have a profound impact in washington. 
in  trying  to  influence  national  policies  by  asserting  state  prerogatives,  wilson  and  the 
propositions  authors  were  using  tried  and  true  tactics  that  date  back  to  debates  over 
repayment of the revolutionary war debt in the earliest days of the republic (suro 1998). 
proposition 187s significance, however, was magnified by two historical circumstances. 
first, it came after more than 100 years of federal dominance of immigration issues. second, 
it came just when washington politics favored ceding powers to the states as a means of 
producing policy change. in this regard, the proposition 187 vote stands as an inflection 
point in the history of immigration federalism.
on  election  day  1994,  voters  nationwide  gave  republicans  a  landslide  victory  that 
produced a 54-seat swing in the us house of representatives. as tichenor notes, the new 
congress was unmistakably caught up by the popular wave of anti-immigrant politics so 
evident in california, leading eventually to federal legislation cracking down on illegal 
immigration and cutting immigrant welfare rights (2002). 
a trio of bills inspired by proposition 187 in their immigration provisions was enacted 
in  1996.  the  anti-terrorism  and  effective  death  penalty  act  (aedpa)  expanded  the 
lists of crimes that could result in deportation and limited both executive discretion and 
judicial  review  in  handling  removals.3  the  illegal  immigration  reform  and  immigrant 
responsibility act (iirira) tightened immigration enforcement on a number of fronts 
from border controls, to law enforcement partnerships, to expanded grounds of removal 
and mandatory detention.4 meanwhile, the personal responsibility and work opportunity 
act  (prwora)  overhauled  federal  welfare  programs  and  included  new  limits  on  the 
federal benefits available to noncitizens, including legal immigrants.5 
anti-immigrant sentiments were not the only political drivers behind these policy changes. 
the iirira and prwora also reflected a central aspect of the ideology espoused by 
representative newt gingrich who served as speaker of the house from 1995 to 1999. 
devolution, the shift of authority from washington to the states, was central to his policy 
agenda, the so-called contract with america. both presidents richard m. nixon in the 
1970s and ronald reagan in the 1980s had undertaken their own forms of devolution each 
with different tactics and objectives. gingrich and his followers used devolution primarily 
in the form of new shared policy responsibilities and their goal was to advance conservative 
social and fiscal policies (conlan 1998).
prwora  justified  the  new  restrictions  on  noncitizens  access  to  social  benefits  on  the 

3   pub. l. 104-132, 110 stat. 1214
4   pub. l. 104-208, 110 stat. 3009
5   pub. l. 104-193, 110 stat. 2105

5

california dreaming: the new dynamism in immigration federalismgrounds that: self-sufficiency has been a basic principle of united states immigration 
law since this countrys earliest immigration statutes.6 but, congress found an entirely 
new  policy  mechanism  for  achieving  this  very  old  objective  of  immigration  policy.  in 
prwora the federal government for the first time explicitly devolved to the states broad 
powers over a noncitizens access to a range of health and welfare benefits. these powers 
include the ability to determine an individuals eligibility under certain circumstances as 
well as the power to determine whether whole classes of immigrants would be eligible for 
state-funded benefits. moreover, the statute declared that these new state powers over the 
lives of immigrants met a compelling government interest thus greatly restricting potential 
judicial review for discrimination or other unconstitutional effects (fix and passel 2002). 
many  components  of  welfare  reform  have  been  revised  since  1996,  including  federal 
eligibility requirements for legal immigrants. but the essential aspects of devolution in the 
immigration realm remain intact with some states taking advantage of their discretionary 
powers to create a wide variety of eligibility and benefit regimes for immigrants while 
other states deny access (hartley 2007; singer 2004; wishnie 2001).
the other major federal immigration legislation enacted in the wake of proposition 187, 
iirira, took another tack on devolution by enlisting state and local governments as allies 
in the enforcement of federal laws that regulate entry and presence, an area of policy that 
had been a redoubt of exclusive federal power. known by the section that was added to 
the immigration and nationality act, the 287(g) program granted local law enforcement 
agencies for the first time the authority to screen people for immigration status, detain them 
and initiate charges that could result in removal (capps et al. 2011). but it wasnt just the 
scope of powers granted to sub-federal actors that made 287(g) a landmark in immigration 
federalism.
each 287(g) agreement was negotiated individually with a local law enforcement agency 
program and was the subject of a signed memorandum with the federal authority in charge of 
immigration enforcement, initially the department of justice and then, following post 9/11 
legislation, the department of homeland security. those agreements varied in both form 
and scope from one jurisdiction to another and required ongoing articulation between local 
and federal authorities over a variety of issues such as training and logistical arrangements 
for the transfer of detainees from local to federal custody. 
moreover, the program granted a high degree of discretion to local authorities, a feature 
that  has  proved  one  of  its  most  controversial  characteristics.  some  critics  see  it  as  an 
opening to unfettered discrimination (wishnie 2001). others see it as an effective means to 
boost enforcement capacities while adapting policy to local circumstances (kobach 2004). 
the program did undoubtedly produce a wide variety of local approaches, so much so 
that the obama administration modified the program twice, in 2009 and 2012, attempting 
to produce greater consistency with its enforcement priorities (smith 2013, capps et al. 
2011).  research into the diverse outcomes of the 287(g) program suggests that highly 
localized concerns quickly trumped federal policy imperatives in determining the extent to 
which police became involved with immigration enforcement.
a 2011 study by the migration policy institute (mpi) found variation by jurisdiction in 

6   8 u.s.c.  1601 (1)

6

journal on migration and human securitywhether they screened for immigration status primarily in jails or in the field or in both. it 
also found wide variation in whether the programs targeted serious criminals or simply tried 
to capture as many unauthorized immigrants as possible. the mpi study also concluded 
that jurisdictions signed 287(g) agreements for a variety of reasons, and that these reasons 
usually reflect state or local pressures often arising from specific incidents that created 
public perceptions linking unauthorized immigrants to crime (capps et al. 2011). looking 
beyond 287(g) alone, research on what kinds of localities adopted restrictive immigration 
policies  found  a  much  more  powerful  association  with  ballot-box  dominance  by  the 
republican party than with demographic factors like the rapid growth of the immigrant 
population (ramakrishnan and gulasekaram 2012). 
a project supported by the national science foundation conducted two national surveys of 
law enforcement officials and three extended case studies to explain the variation in local 
police  engagement  with  immigration  enforcement.  unemployment,  crime  rates  and  the 
size or the pace of growth of the immigrant population had no relation with the severity 
of immigration enforcement. however, the presence of a hispanic police chief was one of 
the most important correlations with less severe enforcement along with the presence of 
hispanic elected officials. codified policies aimed at reducing racial profiling were also 
associated  with  less  intense  immigration  policing  (lewis  et  al.  2013).  the  researchers 
described the result as a multilayered jurisdictional patchwork, in which overlapping and 
neighboring  jurisdictions  can,  and  do,  adopt  conflicting  policies  and  practices  vis--vis 
their immigrant populations (varsanyi et al. 2012).
all of this evidence points to a form of federalism in which federal undertakings such 
as the 1996 legislation produce a proliferation of policy outcomes determined largely by 
local factors. according to some interpretations, the significance of this variation goes far 
beyond the specific policy realms affected. monica w. varsanyi explains that the partial 
devolution of welfare and immigration policy powers challenges rather strict jurisdictional 
lines in place for over a century, and gives state and local governments newfound and 
increasing powers to discriminate on the basis of alienage or non-citizen status (2008). the 
power to discriminate, varsanyi argues, is tantamount to the ability to regulate membership 
in the nation-state such that the 1996 legislation produced a rescaling of one of the most 
fundamental functions of government that was once entirely a federal prerogative. 
for  the  sake  of  this  discussion,  this  paper  is  not  concerned  with  the  effectiveness,  the 
desirability, or the constitutionality of the 1996 legislation. those matters have been, and 
continue to be, debated elsewhere. rather, the papers intent is to make an argument about 
the historical significance of proposition 187 and the federal statutes of 1996 and their 
ongoing influence today in the relationship between the states and the federal government 
on immigration. 
prior to proposition 187 and the 1996 legislation, the federal government exercised virtually 
exclusive authority over policies that regulated immigrant flows as well as many aspects of 
immigrant life. that preeminence had been established first as the result of the civil war 
and the imposition of federal authority over the states on the nature of citizenship. this 
was followed in the 1870s by a series of legislative acts, executive measures and judicial 
decisions through which washington established its sole authority over the regulation of 
immigrant arrivals in the face of state and local actions, particularly those in california 

7

california dreaming: the new dynamism in immigration federalismattempting to curb chinese immigration. by the beginning of the twentieth century, sub-
federal governments had lost a variety of prerogatives over arrival, settlement, access to 
benefits, and education and other matters related to immigrants that they had exercised 
since the colonial era (tichenor 2002; zolberg 2006).   
this paper contends that the mid-1990s marked the beginning of a new era of immigration 
federalism. this era is not characterized by a change in the balance of power, as was the case 
in the 1870s. although states have gained important discretionary powers, washington still 
makes the most important policy decisions and retains control over all the major institutions 
and budget authorities. rather, the key characteristic of this new era is the dynamism in 
federal-state interaction on immigration issues. there are three major tendencies marking 
this dynamism.
first,  lines  of  influence  run  in  both  directions  between  washington  and  the  states, 
sometimes simultaneously and paradoxically. proposition 187 sent a political shockwave 
east  that  helped  produce  the  1996  federal  legislation  that  devolved  power  back  to  the 
states. as californians had demanded, washington toughened enforcement and restricted 
access to benefits, but along the way it also involved state and local governments in the 
implementation of those policies. regardless of where actual decisions are made, both the 
political and policymaking processes are shaped by initiatives and influence that skate back 
and forth between state and federal venues.
second,  the  range  of  actors  involved  in  making  and  implementing  immigration  policy 
has  widened  greatly,  as  have  interactions  among  them,  including  across  jurisdictional 
lines. elected officials and government agencies at the state and local levels now have 
responsibilities over a wide range of polices regarding immigrants but are often required to 
engage in complex interactions with federal counterparts. emergency room care, policing, 
higher education and many other governmental activities now involve some degree of inter-
governmental interaction in a significant number of jurisdictions. moreover, the increased 
immigration  policymaking  at  the  state  and  local  levels  has  stimulated  a  burgeoning  of 
civil society organizations providing services or advocacy in immigrant communities. and, 
simultaneously, advocacy groups supporting exclusionary policies have grown as well in 
response to the new opportunities beyond washington. on both sides of the debate, civil 
society initiatives at the state and local levels are often intertwined with efforts to shape 
federal policies. 
third,  policy  regimes  regarding  immigrants  are  dynamic  across  time  and  space.  the 
discretion available to state and local governments is broad enough and attitudes towards 
immigration vary sufficiently that wide variations are now appearing across the country, 
even  in  neighboring  jurisdictions.  this  is  also  an  evolving  process  with  sub-federal 
initiatives multiplying and taking new directions.  meanwhile, federal policy has developed 
dynamism  of  its  own  with  all  three  branches  of  government  contributing  sometimes-
contradictory directives while engaging in repeated yet unresolved debates about the larger 
purposes and structures of the immigration system. 
examples  of  these  tendenciescross-cutting  influences,  administrative  interaction,  and 
dynamism  across  time  and  spacecan  be  found  prior  to  the  mid-1990s,  but  each  has 
become more pronounced over the past two decades and together they are changing the 

8

journal on migration and human securitynature of immigration federalism. more importantly for purposes of this analysis, these 
developments  are  changing  the  experience  of  being  an  immigrant  in  the  united  states 
and creating the potential for important forms of civic inclusion emerging out of state and 
local initiatives. just as the devolution of powers to the states has created opportunities to 
discriminate against immigrants and to restrict their civic status (motomura 2014; schuck 
2009; varsanyi 2008; wishnie 2001), it has also created opportunities to create new forms 
of welcome and portals to social membership.

arizona and the emergence of civil society actors
the passage of proposition 187 launched a narrative about immigration to the united states 
that features the states and the federal government as its protagonists and efforts to erect 
new policies of enforcement and exclusion as its plot. that narrative culminated in the 2012 
us supreme court decision in arizona v. united states7 regarding the constitutionality of 
harshly restrictionist legislation generally known by its abbreviated designation, sb 1070.
but it is possible to construct a different narrative by seeing events through a wider lens 
that reveals a larger cast of characters and a more complex plot. that narrative begins on 
the evening of april 27, 1990 when more than 1,000 members of an ad hoc citizens group 
calling itself the light up the border campaign gathered along dairy mart road in san 
diego near the us-mexico border to protest lax immigration enforcement. as they had 
on several previous occasions, the protestors lined up cars facing south and turned on the 
headlights in an effort to illuminate illegal border crossers. that evening, however, nearly 
200 counter-protestors arrived, accusing the pro-enforcement group of being racist and 
anti-mexican and holding up sheets of aluminum foil to reflect the car lights back on them 
(mcdonnell 1990).
activists on both sides of that confrontation and the sentiments they aroused continued 
to roil southern california for years to come. the same kind of showy, loosely organized 
grassroots  organizations  joined  forces  with  elected  officials  and  more  formal  advocacy 
groups to launch the campaign that resulted in passage of proposition 187 in 1994 (martinez 
and  carvajal  1994;  oltman  2011).  meanwhile,  student  groups,  unions  and  religious 
organizations formed an improvised campaign to oppose the ballot initiative with public 
protests and campaign advertisements (gutirrez 1999; suro and balz 1994).
thinking  back  to  dairy  mart  road  produces  a  narrative  that  goes  beyond  a  clash  of 
sovereigns to include a variety of civil society actors. moreover, it reveals a counterplot 
of  resistance  to  restrictionism  that  has  accompanied  every  effort  to  boost  enforcement. 
this  broader  perspective  is  essential  to  understanding  how  immigration  federalism  has 
developed into a debate not only over who controls immigration policies but their content 
as well and how that debate has expanded beyond campaign trails and halls of government 
to encompass the living rooms and church basements that are the purview of community 
activists.
the story of how sb 1070 came to be and how it was substantially overturned illustrates 
this point. the bills chief sponsor, arizona state senator russell pearce, had introduced 

7   arizona v. united states 132 s.ct. 2492 (2012).

9

california dreaming: the new dynamism in immigration federalismsimilar legislation to boost the state role in immigration enforcement four times going back 
to 2003 before he succeeded in 2010 in getting the bill enacted (nelson 2010). his efforts 
gained a key ally in 2007 when the former sheriffs deputy contacted a kansas law professor, 
kris w. kobach, who had begun to develop a national reputation for helping draft state and 
local measures on immigration enforcement and then defending them in court (rau 2010). 
kobach recalls becoming interested in immigration by reading about proposition 187 while 
in law school. he started work as a white house fellow in the office of attorney general 
john ashcroft just a few days before the 9/11 attacks. he was a junior but influential figure 
in promoting the idea of using local law enforcement agencies as force multipliers in the 
anti-terrorism fight by enlisting them to enforce immigration laws. subsequently as a law 
professor, kobach became affiliated with the immigration reform law institute (irli). 
founded and financed by the federation for american immigration reform (fair), one 
of the nations oldest and best established restrictionist groups, irli served, in effect, as 
the washington law firm for the forces favoring stricter immigration controls and lower 
immigration flows.  fair and other national restrictionist groups such as numbers usa 
pursued a political strategy that combined washington lobbying and agitation at the local 
level. when pearce came calling, they quickly recognized it as a golden opportunity (pear 
2007; sterling 2010).
in addition to sb 1070, kobach, with irli backing, helped produce copycat legislation 
in five other states. working with irli, kobach also co-authored municipal ordinances 
in hazelton, pennsylvania in 2006 and farmers branch, texas in 2007 that sought to bar 
unauthorized  immigrants  from  renting  housing.  he  penned  another arizona  law  meant 
to crack down on the employment of unauthorized immigrants as well as several other 
state and local immigration measures of similar ilk. elected kansas secretary of state in 
2010, kobach briefly served as an advisor to governor mitt romneys 2012 presidential 
campaign, and after the election he served as a favored expert for congressional republicans 
opposing legalization of the unauthorized on the grounds that the federal government had 
to toughen enforcement first.8
arizonas sb 1070 has been characterized primarily as a confrontation between a state that 
is seeking to expand its authority over immigration enforcement and a federal government 
intent on maintaining its preeminence in that realm (chin and miller 2011; guttentag 2013; 
motomura 2014). but, kobach serves as one highly visible manifestation of the intricate 
interconnections between immigration policy developments at the local, state, and federal 
levels and the extent to which civil society organizations have played an influential role. 
he very openly operated across the full spectrum simultaneously.
sb 1070 can hardly be described as a state-level initiative given kobachs role and that 
of national advocacy organizations like irli in drafting and promoting the legislation, in 
duplicating the results in far-flung states and in carrying litigation to the supreme court. 
moreover, the proponents of state-level initiatives also had policy goals in washington. 
arizonas governor, jan brewer, was every bit as insistent as californias wilson in 1994 
that the overriding objective was to get the federal government to change its policies (rough 
2011). and, when alabama passed its hyped version of sb 1070, irli issued a statement 

8   on kobachs career, ideas and influence, see, (kobach 2004, 2005, 2008; von drehle 2013; greenblatt 

2012).

10

journal on migration and human securitydeclaring it not only the most advanced state immigration law in us history, but also an 
influential guide for nationwide reform by the congress (irli 2011). 
advocates for more generous immigration policies also took sb 1070 as a rallying cry. 
although the supreme court eventually decided a case involving the federal government 
as arizonas opponent, other legal challenges to sb 1070 and the copycat laws elsewhere 
were brought by the american civil liberties union with a coalition of civil rights groups. 
the national council of la raza, a latino civil rights organization, led a travel boycott 
of arizona that produced significant drops in convention and hotel bookings as well as 
the cancellation of performances by a variety of musicians and cultural groups in the year 
after the law was enacted (lacey 2011). just as supporters of sb 1070 sought to leverage 
action at the state level into changes in federal policy, president obama issued a statement 
when the law was struck down saying, what this decision makes unmistakably clear is that 
congress must act on comprehensive immigration reform (whitehouse.gov 2012).  
as  kobach  and  his  allies  sought  to  duplicate  their  success  in  arizona,  civil  society 
organizations in other states mobilized to block legislation.  in 2011, the florida immigrant 
coalition, an umbrella of ethnic, labor, religious and advocacy groups, organized a campaign 
called we are florida! to oppose an sb 1070 copycat bill that was speeding through 
the florida legislature. the campaign conducted a series of demonstrations in tallahassee 
and miami in march and april that drew media attention to the bill and eventually the 
intercession of the states major business groups concerned about a boycott and the potential 
loss of immigrant labor. as the legislative session drew to a close in may, the bill died 
(cotterell 2011; kam 2011; sanders and mazzei 2011). the national immigration law 
center,  a  legal  advocacy  organization  favoring  pro-immigrant  policies,  supported  local 
efforts that helped block arizona copycat laws in texas, colorado, nebraska, kentucky 
and tennessee in 2011 (nilc 2012).

civil society, the new dynamism and dreamers
immigration has been the province of civil society activities dating back to the days of the 
know-nothing party in the 1850s and initiatives by the roman catholic church to help 
settle newcomers in the early twentieth century (higham 1988). as the current wave of 
immigration gained momentum, the long congressional debate leading up to enactment of 
the immigration reform and control act of 1986 (irca) created the first opportunity in 
decades for a wide range of interest groupscivil rights organizations, business groups, 
unions, faith communities and othersto take sides in a capitol hill slugfest on immigration 
policy (tichenor 2008). meanwhile, the implementation of irca, particularly the provisions 
that resulted in the legalization of nearly three million unauthorized immigrants, spurred 
the  development  of  community-based  organizations  in  major  cities  across  the  country, 
helping immigrants with the registration process and then providing services and acting as 
advocates for their socio-economic and political incorporation (baker 1997).  
the devolution of power over welfare and policing in the 1996 legislation created the first 
opportunity in more than a century for civil society groups to take part in debates on state 
and local action that directly influenced federal immigration policy and practice. as noted 
above, the specific application of those laws varied greatly from one place to another, and 

11

california dreaming: the new dynamism in immigration federalismone important factor influencing that variation was the work of policy entrepreneurs who 
were locally-based but were often affiliated with national organizations (gulasekaram and 
ramakrishnan 2013). civil society efforts to shape local policies towards welcome got 
an important boost following the 1996 legislation when the ford foundation, the open 
society institute, the carnegie corporation of new york and other major philanthropies 
created multi-million dollar funds to support efforts on a variety of fronts, including the 
creation of local immigrant rights coalitions, litigation strategies, naturalization campaigns 
and continued lobbying in washington (campos 2014). in the spring of 2006, immigrants 
themselves took to the streets of american cities in protest marches that became one of the 
largest mass demonstrations in us history and obliged congress to take up immigration 
reform legislation (voss and bloemraad 2011). after those legislative efforts failed in 2007, 
the foundations launched another major funding initiative that, according to the new york 
times, eventually saw more than $300 million dispatched to a dozen regional immigrant 
rights groups and a brace of national organizations for a strategy that operated both locally 
and in washington to bring about new federal legislation (preston 2014). 
a  brief  examination  of  the  development  of  policies  towards  early  childhood  arrivals 
illustrates  the  interaction  between  two  key  characteristics  of  the  new  dynamism  in 
immigration federalism: civil society activism and policymaking that slides back and forth 
between federal and state venues. 
a relatively small segment of the unauthorized populationabout 1.7 million people or 15 
percent of the totalis comprised of young adults who came to the united states as children 
(passel and lopez 2012).  they have received more than their share of attention from 
policymakers and advocates.  in 1996, iirira and prwora sought to bar unauthorized 
immigrants from receiving federally-funded financial aid or in-state tuition while attending 
public colleges or universities (ncsl 2011). then in 2001, a large bi-partisan coalition 
in congress introduced legislation that would have given childhood arrivals not just in-
state tuition but a path to legalization if they met certain requirements. versions of that 
legislation, which came to be known as the dream act, were reintroduced repeatedly 
until the act finally went down in defeat in december 2010 (suro 2010). 
while washington remained stalemated, two parallel developments unfolded: several state 
governments weighed in on the issue and a new breed of activists gained national attention. 
although  they  could  not  change  the  young  peoples  immigration  status,  states  passed 
legislation granting them in-state tuition, starting with california and texas in 2001 and 
followed by another 16 states through june 2014 (ncsl 2014).  advocacy groups pressing 
for state and federal versions of the legislation organized the potential beneficiaries, who 
soon  became  known  as  dreamers,  and  who  quickly  launched  their  own  brand  of 
advocacy. for example, the coalition for humane immigrant rights of los angeles, a 
service and advocacy group launched amid the activism surrounding irca implementation, 
created an organization for undocumented high school students, wise up!, which in 2003 
morphed into the california dream network. the organization claimed it was active on 
38 college and university campuses as of 2011 (mora 2011). as frustration mounted with 
lack of progress in washington, similar groups from around the country formed a national 
umbrella organization in 2009, united we dream, and adopted increasingly aggressive 
tactics, including public demonstrations, sit-ins at the offices of elected officials and the 

12

journal on migration and human securitydisruption of political campaign events (nicholls 2013).  
in june 2012 dreamers threatened to disrupt president obamas reelection campaign 
and showed their resolve by holding a sit-in at the campaigns denver office (ingold 2012). 
within weeks,  the  president used  executive authority to  create the  deferred action for 
childhood arrivals (daca) program that offers two years of temporary protection from 
deportation and a work permit to unauthorized young people who meet certain enrollment 
requirements  (preston  2012).  daca  has  offered  substantial  economic  and  educational 
gains  for  the  eventual  587,366  enrollees  (perez  2014).  however,  states  took  widely 
different approaches to the benefits they granted young people with daca credentials, 
ranging from an absolute bar on attending any state college or university (e.g., alabama 
and south carolina) to five states that adopted measures granting them admission with 
in-state  tuition  (e.g.,  massachusetts  and  colorado)  (luzer  2013).  congress  meanwhile 
remained stalemated with the democratic-led senate passing a comprehensive reform bill 
in june 2013 and the republican-led house refusing to act. in november 2014 president 
obama issued a new set of executive orders broadening eligibility for the daca program 
and creating a new program, deferred action for parental accountability (dapa), for the 
parents of us citizens or legal permanent residents (shear 2014). with the proverbial stroke 
of a pen obama demonstrated the national governments sweeping power to determine 
immigration status. meanwhile, state and local governments immediately began to consider 
how they could exercise their own powers to shape implementation of the program and its 
impact (pew 2014).
with the policy action moving from washington to the states, back to washington and then 
back out into the states, and with immigrants themselves taking an activist role, the saga of 
the dreamers demonstrates how the politics and process of immigration policymaking 
has evolved. 

immigration federalism beyond arizona
in the closing lines of his majority decision in arizona v. united states, justice anthony 
kennedy wrote, the sound exercise of national power over immigration depends on the 
nations meeting its responsibility to base its laws on a political will informed by searching, 
thoughtful, rational civic discourse.9 one can question the modifiers but the new dynamism 
in immigration federalism undoubtedly involves vigorous discourse among officials and 
activists  at  all  levels  of  government.  in  the  wake  of  the  decision  in  arizona  there  has 
been a wealth of thinking by immigration scholars about how to depict that discourse, 
looking beyond the drier, and now mostly settled, legal arguments over the balance of 
power in the realm of enforcement. a brief review of some of that literature helps frame an 
understanding of how immigration federalism is evolving.
rejecting  the  notion  that  local  and  national  policymaking  are  sequential,  pratheepan 
gulasekaram  and  karthick  ramakrishnan  examine  the  recent  history  of  immigration 
federalism and conclude that the two processes might work concurrently and at odds with 
one another. so, for example, restrictionist issue entrepreneurs like kobach worked to stall 
federal policymaking while pursuing their agenda in state and local venues that were seen 
9   arizona v. united states 132 s.ct. 2492 (2012) (kennedy j. for the court).

13

california dreaming: the new dynamism in immigration federalismas more favorable politically (2013).
despite the apparent conflict that has characterized state-federal relations over immigration, 
an emphasis on the potential for collaboration emerges out of much of the recent commentary. 
cristina s. rodrguez, for example, is a longtime proponent of a cooperative approach to 
immigration federalism in which all levels of government work together in an integrated 
system of policymaking rather than trying to claim exclusive prerogatives (2008). more 
recently, rodrguez has expanded the scope of her analysis to locate immigration within 
a framework of social issues such as marriage equality, drug control and health care, and 
describes  a  system  in  which  all  levels  of  government  exercise  influence  on  each  other 
and some degree of decision-making powers. rather than a fixed system of relationships, 
rodrguez argues for a vision of dynamism in which the parameters of federalism are 
subject to ongoing negotiation by the players in the system (rodrguez 2014).
a similar emphasis on the discursive possibilities comes from rick su who portrays states 
as uniquely capable intermediaries between national policies and immigrations highly local 
impacts. regardless of federal court decisions coming down heavily in favor of federal 
preeminence, su argues in favor of affirmative steps to incorporate [states] directly into 
the discourse and promote them as a forum for conversation about immigration (2014). 
moving  towards  operationalizing  this  concept,  ming  h.  chen  argues  for  a  distinction 
between  immigration  regulation  at  the  border,  where  federal  law  reigns  supreme  on 
matters of entry, and immigration policies between the borders, where state and local 
governments should be given considerable latitude (2014). 
in one of the most extensive post-arizona analyses, hiroshi motomura argues in his 2014 
book, immigration outside the law, for distinguishing direct involvement in immigration 
law which refers to government decisions whether to admit or exclude aliens, an undisputed 
federal  domain  like  chens  at  the  border  policies.  by  contrast,  motomura  describes 
a realm of indirect involvement where state and local governments can play a role in 
several  different  ways. they  can  become  involved  in  enforcement  through  cooperative 
agreements with federal authorizes or undertake their own efforts to make life difficult for 
unauthorized immigrants. other forms of indirect involvement in motomuras view are 
state and local policies that neutralize federal enforcement policies, effectively shielding 
the unauthorized from federal regulation and thus permitting them to integrate into local 
communities regardless of immigration status (2014).
this paper now turns its attention to the latter kind of state and local policies and their 
potential to change life for the unauthorized and to eventually help change federal policy. 
after  examining  four  different  kinds  of  sub-federal  activities,  the  paper  concludes  that 
state and local governments are doing more than neutralizing federal enforcement policies. 
rather, they are mitigating federal laws and regulations that determine immigration status 
in the sense that they are reducing the penalty to be paid for violating those policies. 
moreover,  the  cumulative  effect  of  the  policies  described  below  can  be  to  create  the 
potential for inclusion of immigrants regardless of status. a useful definition of the term in 
this context comes from maria lorena cook: 

by  inclusion  i  mean  an  individual  or  groups  engagement  with  processes  or 

14

journal on migration and human securityorganizations that recognize the individual or group either by conferring membership 
or by providing resources such as entitlements or protections.  inclusion provides a 
sense of security, stability, and predictability, understood primarily as an ability to plan 
for the future. (2013)

mitigating the federal: inclusion at the local level
as noted above, sub-federal jurisdictions have varied greatly in their willingness to cooperate 
with federal immigration enforcement ever since some policing powers were devolved in 
1996. the secure communities program was launched in 2008 and identified unauthorized 
immigrants for removal by checking the fingerprints of persons arrested or booked into 
custody by local authorities. president obama ended it as one of the executive actions 
announced in november 2014, saying federal agents should focus on deporting felons, 
not families (linthicum 2014). during its short life span, secure communities provoked a 
variety of state and local governments to take actions that neutralize federal immigration 
regulations to borrow motomuras expression. for example, in october 2014 the catholic 
legal immigration network, inc. had counted three states, 26 cities, 233 counties and the 
district  of  columbia  as  having  restricted  cooperation  (clinic  2014).  however,  some 
state and local governments are doing more than that. not satisfied with simply negating 
enforcement, they are taking proactive steps to welcome immigrants regardless of their 
status under federal law. these mitigate the condition of illegality. 
on november 19, 2005, illinois governor rod r. blagojevich signed the new americans 
executive order, which launched a package of efforts to coordinate policies and programs 
that promote integration or otherwise provide services to immigrants and to help the state 
assert its voice on federal immigration policies. the illinois initiative was the result of 
a public-private partnership that involved foundation funding, think-tank advice and an 
explicitly influential advisory role for local and national advocacy groups and civil society 
organizations from immigrant communities (illinois.gov 2005). since then, the model of 
a coordinating office for immigrant services has been adopted in michigan, new york, 
massachusetts  as  well  as  a  number  of  cities  including  los angeles,  philadelphia  and 
baltimore.  in  many  of  these  cases  the  explicit  intent  has  been  to  entice  the  settlement 
of immigrants as part of an economic development strategy (turner 2012). a number of 
rustbelt cities like columbus, cleveland and lansing that were facing population losses 
have recruited immigrants with packages of incentives and services, and in some of the most 
successful cases, like dayton, which has attracted more than 3,000 turkish newcomers, 
local citizens and business groups have joined municipal officials in developing detailed 
action plans for immigrant settlement (altman 2014; preston 2013).  
while  these  welcoming  programs  were  spurred  by  local  concerns  and  local  policy 
entrepreneurs,  other  inclusionary  policies  have  echoed  federal  initiatives.  for  example, 
president clinton issued an executive order in 2000 that requires any state or local agency 
receiving federal funds to bridge language barriers with beneficiaries who have limited 
proficiency in english. however, the federal government has not attempted to dictate how 
this requirement is to be met nor has it undertaken a significant accountability effort. as a 
result, a remarkable variety of approaches have emerged from state and local agencies of 

15

california dreaming: the new dynamism in immigration federalismall sorts, from schools to courtrooms to city halls, utilizing everything from the deliberate 
employment  of  bilingual  staff,  to  the  translation  of  printed  materials,  and  the  use  of 
interpretation technologies (mpi 2014). 
the  two  examples  of  sub-federal  action  described  above  attempt  to  exploit  federal 
immigration  policies  for  maximum  local  benefit.  these  efforts  certainly  are  not 
contravening federal intentions, but they are creating conditions not necessarily envisioned 
by the framers of federal policy. dayton, for example, has made unique uses of federal 
policies in order to welcome a stateless ethnic turkish population, the aishka, first finding 
spaces through refugee admissions and then through both family and business visas, and 
specifically facilitating real estate investments that have rejuvenated declining parts of the 
city (navera 2014).  compliance with the federal language access requirement has varied 
enormously as some jurisdictions and agencies have embraced it energetically while others 
have ignored it to the point that the justice department in a 2011 memorandum complained 
about the uneven response even within the federal government.10 
all of these local initiatives have two other characteristics in common. to varying degrees 
they  all  create  points  of  interaction  between  immigrants  and  government  offices,  local 
business, civil society organizations and ordinary citizens. the welcoming initiatives in 
particular  have  also  often  stimulated  the  creation  of  civil  society  organizations  within 
immigrant  communities  to  mediate  interactions  with  the  host  community.  the  second 
common characteristic is that these sub-federal initiatives erase, or at least blur, the many 
levels of immigration that are at the heart of federal policies. virtually all of these local 
initiatives  have  deliberately  adopted  a  dont  ask,  dont  tell  approach  to  immigration 
status. in some cases this has been a matter of publicly announced policies not to inquire 
about an individuals status unless it is explicitly required by a state or federal law. in other 
cases government agencies contract out all services and do not require the contractors to 
conduct status verification (montalvo et al. 2014). so, for example, an individual might 
receive advice on opening a small business, get directed to training classes, and complete 
forms in her native language, but she will be advised that obtaining a federal small business 
loan will require proof of status while a loan from a local bank might not.
for an unauthorized immigrant, the sub-federal policies described above begin to mitigate 
the status of illegality. this word is used here to mean an action that lessens the severity 
of  a  negative  condition,  or  reduces  the  penalty  for  an  offense.  these  policies  actively 
encourage interactions between unauthorized immigrants, public officials, and community 
institutions that might not happen otherwise. as a matter of public policy, they create safe 
spaces where some of the harshest negative consequences of federal illegality are alleviated 
if not erased. self-ostracism from public agencies even when interactions are permissible 
and social isolation from the civic institutions of a host community are not explicit aspects 
of federal policy, but they are undoubtedly one of the effects and often have devastating 
results  on  households  (yoshikawa  2011).  the  policies  described  above  create  specific 
venues where the effects of federal immigration status are mitigated. sub-federal policies 

10   memorandum from attorney general eric holder to heads of federal agencies, general counsels, and 

civil rights heads, federal governments renewed commitment to language access obligations under 
executive order 13166, 17 february 2011. http://www.lep.gov/13166/ag_021711_eo_13166_memo_to_
agencies_with_supplement.pdf. 

16

journal on migration and human securitythat give documents to the undocumented go a step further. 
the issuance of a drivers license has traditionally been the purview of state government. 
the federal government entered the field with enactment of the real id act of 2005 
which  sets  standards  for  drivers  licenses  and  other  identity  documents  that  federal 
agencies  recognize  for  purposes  such  as  boarding  a  commercial  airplane  or  entering  a 
federal facility.11 under those standards no unauthorized immigrant can obtain a drivers 
license. due to various controversies, the full implementation of the real id act has 
been repeatedly postponed, but many states nonetheless have adjusted their drivers license 
laws and regulations to produce federally compliant documents. by 2013, however, 10 
states and the district of columbia had passed legislation to create parallel licenses that 
would not be valid for federal use, but that also would not require the documentation of 
immigration status delineated in the real id act (trpi 2014). 
holding a drivers license can have important practical consequences for an unauthorized 
immigrant. it can improve employment possibilities and lower exposure to the penalties of 
driving without a license, a crime in all but a handful of states. along with municipal identity 
cards of the sort to be issued by new york city, a license can facilitate check cashing, the 
use of a credit card, enrollment in school and myriad other day-to-day activities. in all of 
these ways an identity document issued by a sub-federal government further mitigates the 
federal status of being an unauthorized immigrant. moreover, it has an important intangible 
effect  by  conferring  the  most  basic  form  of  recognition  on  an  individual. through  the 
issuance of a drivers license or identity card, an unauthorized immigrant regains the use of 
their own name which otherwise might have to be dissembled in the false documents which 
are essential to life out of status.
the process of obtaining this identification can itself create further points of engagement 
that reduce the social isolation of an unauthorized immigrant. in the final months of 2014, 
as california prepared for implementation of its new drivers license law at the start of the 
new year, thousands of unauthorized immigrants attended training sessions at churches, 
community organizations, schools, and public libraries. meanwhile, the state department 
of motor vehicles engaged in a massive outreach effort and added 900 employees and 
four new processing centers to speed the effort (gonzalez and espinoza 2014). with each 
training session unauthorized immigrants are encountering volunteers or state employees 
who are making a positive effort to include them in a formal governmental process. and in 
many instances, immigrants themselves are organizing to prepare their compatriots for the 
application process. 
when all of the policies described in this section are applied together as is the case in some 
major concentrations of the immigrant population such as new york, chicago and large 
parts of california, the cumulative effect can be the creation of a new kind of civic status 
that permits an unauthorized immigrant to engage openly with schools, hospitals, police 
departments and other government agencies. this can open up encounters as significant 
as reporting a crime to the seemingly trivial such as a call to an animal control agency 
about  a  stray  dog  which  might  otherwise  be  fraught.  moreover,  the  implementation  of 
welcoming policies and the process of registering for benefits such as a drivers license 

11   p.l. 109-13, div. b.

17

california dreaming: the new dynamism in immigration federalismcan involve interactions with civil society organizations of all sorts and the formation of 
stronger community organizations among immigrants themselves.

conclusion
at the start of 2015 in california, home to a quarter of all the foreign-born in the united 
states  including  some  2.5  million  unauthorized  immigrants,  an  individual  regarded  as 
out-of-status by federal standards can get a drivers license, apply for a number of health 
and welfare programs, go to a state university and pay in-state tuition, and practice law.  
meanwhile, across the state line in arizona that same person would be subject to the show-
me-your-papers provision of sb 1070 which the supreme court let stand. they would 
also be subject to state regulations that could turn any contact with a state agency into an 
encounter with a federal agent, and any prospective employer would be obliged to check 
the individuals identity against a federal database. 
the united states now has dozens of immigration policies that are determined by a mix 
of local, state and federal directives rather than just one federal policy set in washington. 
this  patchwork  is  the  result  of  two  decades  of  continuous  exchanges  across  all  levels 
of  government  over  immigration  policies,  particularly  those  related  to  unauthorized 
immigrants,  and  the  actions  of  newly-empowered  advocates  in  civil  society.  at  the 
sub-federal level this has produced such a variety of policies that the meaning of being 
unauthorized can vary greatly from one place to another. at the federal level, political 
stalemate has blocked congress from passing reform legislation, but president obama in 
2012 and 2014 deployed executive actions to create new protected classes of individuals. 
the net effect has been to move the issue away from the black and white delineations of 
statutory provisions and towards a proliferation of grey areas that invite still further action 
by sub-federal governments to define the practical consequences of status. meanwhile, the 
judiciary has set limits on how far state and local governments can go to restrict the activities 
of the unauthorized or how aggressively they can funnel them into the federal enforcement 
system. but, within those limits many sub-federal jurisdictions remain explicitly hostile to 
unauthorized immigrants while others offer various forms of welcome and even shelter. 
in principle, a system of federalism that is so dynamic and that leads to such divergent 
results might seem unlikely to survive its own  instability and ineffectiveness. yet over 
the past 20 years the combination of practices described in this paper have become so 
ingrained that it seems unlikely that strict uniformity could be imposed even if washington 
enacted the most sweeping immigration reform. in this regard immigration has become 
more  like  several  other  major  issues  that  are  defined  by  wide  policy  variations  among 
states, like abortion, or variations between states and the federal government, like the sale 
and possession of marijuana. this is more than a matter of process, which is rodrguezs 
emphasis. it has become a matter of facts on-the-ground that have acquired a hardened 
permanence. leaving aside the constitutional questions, it is hard to imagine how a national 
government, even under the united rule of one party, would impose on new york the same 
abortion regulations that apply in texas or require mississippi to adopt colorados laws 
on marijuana. similarly, it is hard to imagine how any combination of federal laws could 
impel california and arizona to adopt the same policies towards unauthorized immigrants.  

18

journal on migration and human securitylack of uniformity is the price for the kind of federalism that has developed on immigration, 
and after two decades it may be time to start considering policy diversity the norm rather than 
an aberration. state and local governments have been given important roles on immigration 
by federal actions, and they have taken on roles by their own initiative. immigration policy 
operates as a dynamic interaction among governments at all levels, and it is subject to the 
influence of a wide spectrum of policy actors ranging from the two established political 
parties to political mobilization by communities of newcomers with no civic status. these 
are accomplished facts. they reflect several processes that have hardened over the past two 
decades: the growth of a large and well-established immigrant population; the establishment 
of a federalist arrangement that involves extensive interaction between state and federal 
government  over  major  domestic  policies  such  as  health,  education,  law  enforcement, 
and  immigration;  and  steadily  intensifying  partisan  and  ideological  polarization. these 
circumstances do not seem likely to change any time soon.
it was not the intent of this paper to draw judgments about the worthiness or the workability 
of these developments. after all, one of the prime characteristics of the new dynamism in 
immigration federalism described here is a diversity of policies, processes and outcomes. 
by its very nature such diversity is difficult to judge. anyone with strong views on the 
subject is likely to find some developments to favor and others to oppose. and given the 
fact that this is a highly dynamic situation, any such judgments may only be valid until an 
election changes control of a state house or a governors mansion, congress or the white 
house.  the united states has a long but not felicitous history of regionalism characterized 
by the differential treatment of groups by race, national origin and economic class.  over the 
course of that history the federal government has a mixed record of guaranteeing national 
norms of social or economic justice or even simply assuring that minimum human rights 
standards are met. arguably, we are at a low ebb in washingtons abilities to homogenize 
regional  differences  on  social  issues  and  immigration  potently  provokes  heterogeneous 
responses across the country. 
now, and for the foreseeable future, the experience of being an immigrant in the united 
states will vary significantly from place to place, and that variation will include the quality of 
an immigrants interaction with public agencies of all sorts. some places will be welcoming 
and inclusive and other places will be inhospitable and exclusionary. these differences 
will be most notable for unauthorized migrants but will apply to legal immigrants and 
even naturalized citizens to some extent. but, immigrants will not be passive objects of 
the climates they inhabit. the devolution of decision making over immigration policy to 
states and localities has greatly increased the potential influence of civil society over those 
decisions, including civil society generated by immigrant communities themselves.  
president  obama  is  fond  of  saying  that  we  are  both  a  nation  of  laws  and  a  nation  of 
immigrants. he may be remembered for having overseen the enshrinement of a dynamic 
immigration federalism marked by a great diversity of laws and a great many different 
ways of being an immigrant in the united states. 

19

california dreaming: the new dynamism in immigration federalism