book review 
the price of rights: regulating 
international labor migration 
by  martin  ruhs.  princeton,  nj:  princeton  university 
press, 2013. 272 pages.

susan gzesh
university of chicago

international human rights are inalienable, 
indivisible,  and  universal.  one  cannot 
bargain away ones rights (inalienable); 
human  rights  are  a  whole  with  economic 
rights and civil rights being inter-dependent 
(indivisible);  and  human  rights  do  not 
depend  on  citizenship  or  membership 
in  a  nation-state  (universal).  a  human 
being  does  not  lose  his  or  her  human 
rights  by  crossing  a  border.    however  in 
state  regulation  of  the  entrance  and  stay 
of  temporary  migrant  workers,  the  ideal 
of universal human rights clashes with the 
prerogatives of sovereignty and power. 

(particularly 

migrant  workers 
those 
classified  as  low-skilled)  find  that  the 
surrender  of  their  rights  is  the  price  of 
admission to labor immigration programs 
which allow them to provide their families 
back  home  with  the  means  of  survival. 
this  is  the  global  phenomenon  described 
and  analyzed  by  martin  ruhs,  university 
lecturer  in  political  economy  and  senior 
researcher  at  the  centre  on  migration, 
policy,  and  society  at  the  university  of 
oxford  (united  kingdom)  in  his  new 
book.  in  the  price  of  rights:  regulating 

thoughtful  conclusions 

international  labor  migration  (princeton 
university  press,  2013),  ruhs  provides 
a  comprehensive  overview  of  legal  and 
policy  regimes  and  current  literature,  an 
impressive  amount  of  empirical  research, 
and  asks  many  substantial  questions.  he 
reaches 
in  his 
analysis  of  what  is  and  his  proposals 
of  what  should  be.  however,  migrants 
and  their  advocates  in  the  united  states 
may  respond  with  questions  regarding 
the practicality of, for example, a call for 
increased enforcement of labor rights when 
most receiving states lack the political will 
to  dedicate  resources  necessary  for  such 
enforcement.   

the  campaign 

as  ruhs  notes, 
for 
ratification of the international convention 
on  the  protection  of  the  rights  of  all 
migratory workers and members of their 
families (cmw) has stalled if not stopped 
entirely, with almost no migrant-receiving 
states  among  the  states  parties.  migrant-
receiving states, ruhs notes, have relatively 
high levels of ratification of other human 
rights treaties. however, as ruhs observes, 
while accepting the idea of human rights, 

 2014 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 2 number 1 (2014): 14-21journal on migration and human security

the worlds high-income countrieswhere 
migrants are most heavily concentrated
clearly  do  not  accept  that  these  rights 
should  apply  to  migrants  living  on  their 
territories (ruhs 2013, 17). 

free 

a 

with  no  effective  mechanisms  of  global 
governance,  nation-states  are 
to 
act  towards  migrant  workers  in  their 
own  national  interest  which,  as  ruhs 
demonstrates,  means  the  restriction  of 
access  to  certain  rights  or  social  benefits 
only  to  their  own  citizens.    factors  that 
influence  national  policymakers  are: 
economic efficiency, national identity and 
social  cohesion,  and  national  security. 
the  relative  weight  ascribed  to  each 
factor  depends  on  historical  and  social 
conditionspolitical  systems,  the  power 
of  the  private  sector  and/or  labor  unions, 
public  opinion,  and  general  economic 
conditionsthus 
variety 
of  labor  immigration  schemes. 
  this 
reviewer  suggests  the  terms  national 
identity  and  social  cohesion  may  be 
used  by  policymakers  as  code  words  to 
mask  racist  and  xenophobic  attitudes. 
ruhs  explanation  of  the  weight  given 
certain  factors  by  policymakers  might 
be  supplemented  by  an  analysis  of  the 
influence  of  former  colonial  relationships 
between some of todays migrant-receiving 
states and migrant-sending states.   

yielding 

ruhs  finds  that  nation-states  are  willing 
to  grant  more  rights  to  more  highly-
compensated migrants in order to attract 
talent,  but  are  reluctant  to  grant  access 
to  social  rights  to  low-skilled  workers.  
he  states  that  policymakers  often  believe 
that certain policies will have a particular 
impact  on  migrants  when,  in  fact,  results 
may  not  have  been  tested  or  proven.  
ruhs  does  not  argue  or  assume  that  it  is 
normatively desirable to restrict migrant 

family 

rights as the price of admission, but that 
is the reality he observes (ruhs 2013, 50).
 
ruhs  supports  his  analysis  with  a 
quantitative, comparative overview of over 
100 labor immigration visa regimes in 43 
countries, using the cmw as the benchmark 
while  admitting  that  quantifying  human 
rights presents challenges and limitations. 
rights  measured  include  access  to  health 
care, 
reunion,  unemployment 
benefits, general labor rights and equality 
with  national  workers.    not  surprisingly, 
he  finds  considerable  variation  between 
countries across all possible rights granted 
to foreign workers with restriction on choice 
of employer the most common. ruhs finds 
some correlation between skills level and 
rights, but cautions that correlation is not 
necessarily causation (89). he notes that the 
data  presented  concerns  only  migrants  in 
authorized work visa programs and does not 
cover other possible categories of migrants 
who  may  be  working,  such  as  refugees, 
unauthorized persons, students, or trainees. 
one factor noted by ruhs is that access to 
certain  rights  may  be  formally  the  same 
between two countries, but yield different 
experiences for migrants in practice.  for 
example,  where  migrants  have  a  right  of 
access to public health systems, they may 
find a real difference in quality of services 
between different countries. 

temporary  worker 

after  describing  the  variation  between 
various 
regimes, 
ruhs  asks,  why  are  labor  immigration 
programs that target higher-skilled workers 
characterized by greater openness and more 
rights for migrants than programs that admit 
lower-skilled  workers?  while  failing  to 
find a satisfactory answer, his descriptions 
of  labor  migration  policy  in  western 
europe,  southeast  asia,  the  gulf  states, 
canada,  australia,  and  the  united  states 

15

are  quite  informative  and  should  be  read 
by anyone seeking a global understanding 
of policy options. ruhs concludes that one 
cannot determine whether policy decisions 
in  high-income  countries  are  based  on 
actual evidence or subjective notions about 
national interest (120).

migrant-sending  countries  are  faced  with 
a  conundrum  of  advocating  for  greater 
rights  (and  presumably  higher  wages  and 
remittances) for their nationals but risking 
rejection by receiving states and employers. 
sending 
states  encourage  emigration 
for  work  based  on  an  understanding 
that  migrant  remittances  will  improve 
their  national  economies  and  resolve  the 
problems that send migrants abroad in the 
first  instance.    ruhs,  however,  concludes 
that  the  social  sciences  literature  fails  to 
support any conclusion that remittances will 
have  large-scale  positive  impact  beyond 
the scale of the individual migrants family 
or immediate community. the reader may 
find  here  evidence  to  question  the  long-
term  wisdom  of  policymakers  in  sending 
countries  who  have  promoted  migrant 
remittances  as 
their  primary  national 
development strategy. 

of particular interest to policy advocates is 
ruhs discussion about the seesaw efforts 
of  some  asian  governments  to  threaten 
or 
implement  bans  against  migrants 
temporary work in certain middle eastern 
states. according  to  ruhs,  none  of  these 
threats  or  bans  have  improved  conditions 
for  asian  migrants  and,  in  at  least  one 
instance,  have  resulted  in  a  destination 
country  (saudi  arabia)  explicitly  barring 
workers  whose  countries  of  origin 
(indonesia  and 
the  philippines)  made 
demands for better labor conditions.   

ruhs  work  raises  unanswered  questions 

which call for more research on the actual 
enforcement of migrants rights.  migrants 
face substantial difficulties enforcing those 
few rights granted in their contracts or by 
national legislation in receiving countries. 
where  abuses  do  occur,  recruiters  and 
middlemen  enjoy  substantial  impunity 
due  to  the  transnational  nature  of  their 
work, the threat of harassment of migrants 
families  left  behind,  the  jurisdictional 
limits  of  national  courts,  and  the  lack  of 
any effective regional or global governance 
mechanisms  beyond 
limited  successes 
in  the  european  court  of  human  rights.  
a  comprehensive  global  study  on  the 
enforceability  of  existing  labor  contract 
rights  for  lawful  temporary  workers  is 
needed.  
 
unfortunately,  ruhs  overview  of 
the 
situation  in  north  america  fails  to  fully 
account for the largest and longest-running 
bilateral  labor  migration  in  the  world, 
between mexico and the united states. he 
describes  mexicos  20th  century  policy 
of  non-intervention  as  an  acceptance 
of  relatively  open  access  for  millions  of 
unauthorized  mexicans  to  work  in  the 
united states in return for remittance flows 
and an escape valve for excess population.  
however, new policies (largely on the us 
side)  have  made  the  old  model  obsolete. 
the past decade has seen vastly increased 
us  border  enforcement,  unprecedented 
criminalization  of  migrant  smuggling, 
and  a  dramatic  increase  in  deportations.  
additionally, tens of thousands of mexican 
workers enter the united states each year 
as part of growing guest-worker programs 
in agricultural (h-2a) and non-agricultural 
(h-2b)  jobs.  a  study  of  the  challenges 
faced  by  migrants  and  their  advocates 
seeking to enforce even the limited rights 
in  these  programs  would  enhance  the 
global  overview  of  those  issues. a  report 

16

journal on migration and human securityon the efforts of the government of mexico 
to  advocate  for  the  rights  of  mexican 
nationals  through  its  network  of  over  50 
consulates in the united states would be a 
useful addition to the discussion as well.  

ruhs gives more attention to the relatively 
small canadian program of legal seasonal 
agricultural  workers,  el  programa  de 
trabajadores  agricolas 
temporales 
(ptat).  while  similar  to  asia-middle 
eastern  programs,  it  is  highly  regulated 
and 
among 
sending countries, which include mexico, 
guatemala, and some caribbean countries.  
in  the  ptat,  the  sending  governments 
face conflicts between insistence on rights 
protection and desirability of their workers 
to canadian employers. 

competition 

subject 

to 

also of interest is ruhs description of the 
complex,  changing  european  models  of 
worker mobility since the 2004 accession 
of  eight  eastern  european  countries  with 
substantially  lower  labor  standards  and 
wages. while individual eastern european 
workers can travel to work independently 
in western european countries, firms from 
eastern  europe  also  contract  for  labor 
projects  in  the  west,  using  workers  from 
their own countries often at inferior wages 
compared to the country of destination.  in 
one important case in 2008, the european 
court  of  human  rights  ruled  that  it  was 
illegal  for  swedish  unions  to  boycott  a 
latvian  construction  firm  working  on 
projects in sweden using latvian workers 
who were paid less than the swedish union-
negotiated prevailing wage. the court ruled 
that since the latvian workers were being 
paid the legal swedish minimum wage, the 
swedish unions were barred from trying to 
pressure  the  latvian  employer  to  pay  the 
higher union-negotiated wage.    

ruhs explores whether temporary migrant 
labor programs are inherently in violation 
of human rights due to the almost universal 
restrictions  on  family  unity  and  choice 
of  employer,  and  by  their  restrictions 
on  electoral  rights  and/or  transition  to 
citizenship, resulting in the perpetuation of 
an excluded class.  ruhs is willing to accept 
these  restrictions,  he  says,  because  he 
believes that temporary migrant programs 
are only possible with them, and that there 
are no existing, feasible policy alternatives 
besides  total  exclusion.  he  believes  that 
temporary  migrant  labor  programs  are 
second-best  to  the  most  idealistic  and 
unattainable alternatives of open borders or 
lawful permanent residence for all workers. 

allow 

that  vulnerability 

ruhs  concedes 
to 
exploitation  is  inherent  in  programs  that 
limit  choice  of  employer. 
  however, 
states 
admission  because  of 
sectoral  shortages  and  employers  pay  for 
transportation  costs  because  they  need  a 
set number of workers.  ruhs suggests that 
temporary workers be required to spend an 
initial period with the recruiting employer, 
but  later  be  permitted  to  work  for  any 
employer within the particular sector. 

ruhs  advocates  that  temporary  workers 
have  access  to  state-administered  social 
welfare  programs 
that  are  based  on 
employer  or  employee  contributions,  but 
he  would  allow  exclusion  of  temporary 
workers  from  means-tested  benefits.  he 
states that access to health care for migrants 
is  a  necessary  cost  to  the  state,  because 
denial  of  access  is  not  in  the  long-term 
public  health  interest  of  receiving-states.  
ruhs  would  accept  restrictions  on  family 
unity  (which  he  recognizes  as  a  human 
right) unless workers demonstrate that they 
can support their families without a burden 
on the receiving-state (and counting public 

17

journal on migration and human securityeducation costs of migrant children in the 
calculation  of  burden).  thus,  all  but 
highly-paid  temporary  workers  would  be 
restricted from family unity rights (not to 
mention  the  violation  of  the  rights  of  the 
migrants children to family unity, a topic 
beyond the scope of the book).  

with  respect  to  eventual  transition  to 
permanent residence and citizenship, ruhs 
concedes  that  any  guarantee  of  future 
citizenship  would  significantly 
lower 
receiving  countries  incentives  to  admit 
some  migrant  workersespecially  low- 
and  medium-skilled  workersin  the  first 
place. he therefore advocates for a time 
limit  (somewhat  arbitrarily  set  at  four 
years)  beyond  which  temporary  migrant 
workers  would  be  admitted  to  permanent 
residency or have to return to their home 
country.  

ruhs  discussion  of  mandatory  return 
should be supplemented by studies on the 
assumption  of  such  programs,  e.g.,  will 
temporary workers stay home after a limited 
period abroad?  this reviewer remembers 
a  mexican  colleagues  enthusiasm  about 
a  proposed  new  mexico-us  temporary 
worker program which would require return 
after  four  years.  what,  this  reviewer 
asked, will a 24-year-old former migrant 
do when he returns to his home community 
where there were no opportunities for him 
when  he  was  20?    given  the  options  of 
joining local organized crime or suffering 
with  his  family  on  their  barely-arable 
land, what would keep him from returning 
without authorization to the united states?  
what will have changed in his community 
of origin that would keep him there?  

ruhs  extensive 
research  and  global 
perspective,  if  read  through  the  critical 
lens of advocates with experience in actual 

cases,  may  help  shape  programs  that 
can  provide  for  the  rights  and  dignity  of 
workers.  ruhs asks a key question, is it 
possible to design and implement new and/
or  expanded  temporary  labor  migration 
programs  for  low-  and  medium-skilled 
migrant  workers  in  a  way  that  delivers 
the  intended  benefits  for  the  migrant-
receiving  country  yet  avoids  the  adverse 
consequences  that  such  programs  have 
often generated in the past? (178).

however, ruhs argues in his final chapter 
that  insisting  on  the  enforcement  of  the 
human  rights  of  present  migrants  may 
increase  state  reluctance  to  admit  more 
future migrants. in his attempt to persuade 
the  reader  that  the  rights-access  trade-off 
is not contrary to human rights principles, 
he correctly notes that not all human rights 
are  considered  fundamental  rights  (197-
98).  however,  the  situations  in  which 
some non-fundamental human rights may 
be  abrogated  are  restricted  to  serious 
temporary emergencies of national security 
(see,  e.g., 
the  international  covenant 
on  civil  and  political  rights,  article  6).  
otherwise, migrant advocates will continue 
to insist that all human rights be respected. 

ruhs  opens  a  debate  on  whether  the 
insistence  on  strict  adherence  to  human 
rights  principles  can,  in  fact,  influence 
states to limit migrant admission numbers.  
ruhs  criticizes  the  insistence  of  various 
united  nations  (un)  bodies  on  the  full 
enforcement  of  the  rights  of  migratory 
workers but admits that it is their role.  he 
recalls a personal experience in 2009, prior 
to the athens global forum on migration 
and  development  (gfmd), 
in  which 
the  officials  of  the  office  of  the  high 
commissioner  of  human  rights  were 
quite uneasy about his inclusion in a talk 
at their sessions of the concept of a cost 

18

journal on migration and human securityof rights (191). ruhs uses this anecdote to 
illustrate  the  reluctance  of  un  agencies 
to  engage  in  an  honest  dialogue  about 
trade-offs  between  what  he  refers  to  as 
two goods: rights protection for existing 
migrants  or  increased  opportunities  for 
legal labor migration (190). this reviewer 
thinks  it  concedes  too  much  to  depict 
those goods as oppositional, but joins in 
ruhs call for discussion and debate about 
the  fundamental  human  rights  of  migrant 
workers, with an insistence on honesty on 
the part of all parties.  

labor 

organizations, 

the  labor  and  human  rights  of  migratory 
workersboth  legal  and  unauthorized
have  received  increased  attention  from 
advocates, 
and 
international  agencies  in  the  past  decade.  
ruhs analysis is largely state-centric. he 
does not analyze the successful and failed 
efforts  of  advocacy  organizations,  trade 
unions,  and  migrant-led  organizations  in 
transnational  campaigns  to  vindicate  the 
rights of migrant workers.  an examination 
addressed 
of 
the 
trade-off  would 
complement  and  complete  the  discussion 
ruhs seeks to generate. 

campaigns 
access-rights 

that  have 

ruhs  work  employs  the  conventional 
categories  of  high-skilled  and  low-
skilled, 
terms  used  by  policymakers 
across  the  globe.    one  might  debate  the 
high-skilled/low-skilled 
labels  which 
are  the  common  currency  of  immigration 
policymakers.  this  reviewer  urges  that 
the 
description 
be  replaced  by  a  high-paid/low-paid 
description. as anyone who has cared for 
the ill, the elderly or young children knows, 
those  jobs  require  a  very  high  degree  of 
skill  but  are  generally  filled  by  low-paid 
immigrants. the value of the work of low-
paid workers may be differently understood 

high-skill/low-skill 

not 

successful 

necessarily 

if  policymakers  would  realize  that  even 
the  most  high-skill  software  innovator 
would have fundamental problems without 
a wide network of support from low-skill 
workers who grow and prepare the food he 
or she eats and care for his or her children.  
in  many  societies,  those  roles  are  filled 
not  by  legal  guest  workers  (the  subjects 
of  this  book)  but  by  asylum  seekers 
and  refugees,  unauthorized  migrants,  or 
internal  migrants.  saskia  sassens  early 
work  on  the  relations  between  the  high-
skilled  and  low-skilled  sectors  of  the 
labor market illuminates this question (see 
sassen 1998).
 
the  work  of  un  and  inter-american 
special  rapporteurs  on  migrant  rights 
has  been  useful  in  exposing  problems, 
but 
in 
improving  conditions.  in  2013, 
labor 
unions,  farmworker  organizations,  and 
employer associations negotiated a historic 
compromise  on  rights  for 
temporary 
agricultural  workers  in  the  united  states, 
but  the  us  congress  did  not  pass  the 
negotiated  legislation.    the  un  high 
level dialogue on international migration 
and  development  in  october  2013  noted 
that  temporary  foreign  workers  deserve 
respect and dignity, but failed to produce 
any firm recommendations to governments 
for stricter enforcement of migrant worker 
rights. the attention to rights corresponds to 
a trend in the last decade towards increased 
use of temporary worker programs as part 
of  an  overall  effort  by  states  to  control 
unauthorized  migration  while  satisfying 
employer interest in accessing dependable 
sources  of  low-cost  labor.    as  noted  by 
ruhs,  the  tension  between  access  to  jobs 
and  rights  protection  will  continue  as  a 
local and global problem.  

ruhs is to be lauded for his assertion that 

19

journal on migration and human securityrespecting  the  agency  and  choices  of 
prospective  and  current  migrant  workers 
is a core consideration (177).  however, 
he is overly optimistic about the guarantees 
of enforcement of core rights he would 
assure to migrants as a trade-off for those 
rights  they  would  sacrifice.  for  migrant 
workers  and  their  advocates,  some  rights 
limitations (choice of employer, employee 
deductions  for  travel  costs,  and  family 
separation) are viewed as inherent in almost 
all  existing  temporary  worker  programs. 
among  the  most  serious  abuses  of  rights 
are the extortion of high fees by recruiters 
and  passport  confiscation  by  employers, 
as well as wage theft, safety issues, sexual 
harassment,  and  other  sub-standard  labor 
conditions. 
  lack  of  visa  portability 
and  access  to  trade  unions  weakens  the 
temporary 
ability  of  even  authorized 
workers 
these  violations. 
consular intervention can solve problems 
of  individual  workers,  but  rarely  can 
address  systemic  issues.  ruhs  insistence 
on  respect  for  the  agency  of  migrant 
workers  themselves  is  welcome  and  he 
encourages  more  transparency  in  migrant 
labor  contracting.    however,  structural 
factors in countries of origin may impede 
migrants  actual  choices  about  accepting 
proffered contracts.   

to  protest 

recommends 

one  recommendation 
illustrates  ruhs 
general lack of attention to the perspective 
of  migrants.  ruhs 
that 
receiving  countries  should  ensure  that 
migrant workers do not become trapped in 
the host country because, for example, they 
were  charged  excessive  recruitment  fees 
that  need  to  be  repaid  and  prevent  them 
from  considering  a  return  to  their  home 
countries (178). what can a host country 
government do about excessive recruitment 
fees?  consider the case of a migrant who 
owes  an  excessive  recruitment  fee  to 

20

someone in her home country and has not 
worked  long  enough  to  repay  it.    if  the 
migrant  abandons  her  job  or  otherwise 
fails  to  pay,  how  can  the  host  country 
government  possibly  protect  her  or  her 
family at home from reprisals? this is a key 
question for some us-based advocates who 
understand  the  relative  powerlessness  of 
the us government to protect an exploited 
migrant  (and  his  or  her  home  country 
family  members)  from  the  predations  of 
a  criminal  enterprise  in  fujian,  china,  or 
veracruz, mexico, to cite two known cases. 
regulation of recruitment abuses can only 
come  from  joint,  effectively-administered 
programs under the direction of home and 
host country governments.    

in 

selected  countries 

some  advocacy  campaigns  have  been 
successful  in  closing  the  gaps  between 
ideals and realities of migrant labor rights 
in  certain  sectors.    home-care,  cleaning, 
and  personal  service  workers  (a  largely 
immigrant and female workforce) persuaded 
the 
international  labor  organization 
(ilo) in 2011 to recognize their rights as 
workers. they continue to build organizing 
campaigns 
to 
promote ratification of the convention on 
domestic workers and to pass new laws. 
farmworker  advocates  in  the  us  secured 
collective bargaining rights for california 
farmworkers  decades  ago  and,  more 
recently, have been successful in litigating 
limits on the deduction of travel costs from 
wages.    after  a  sustained  campaign  by 
workers and advocates, the us department 
of labor recently agreed to apply overtime 
and  minimum  wage  regulations  to  home-
care  workers.  us  advocacy  organizations 
such  as  farmworker  justice,  centro  de 
los  derechos  del  migrante,  farm  labor 
organizing  committee,  national  day 
labor organizing network, new orleans 
workers  center  for  racial  justice,  and 

journal on migration and human securitythe  national  employment  law  project 
have  succeeded  in  improving  conditions 
for  guest  workers  in  selected  cases  in 
construction,  agriculture,  food-processing 
and other sectors.  

other advocacy efforts have failed, at least 
in their initial stages. migrant workers may 
fear  retaliation  in  their  home  countries, 
beyond the reach of advocates or courts in 
their  country  of  employment.  successful 
litigation  of  large-scale  labor  rights  cases 
requires  an  investment  of  resources  few 
nongovernmental  organizations  or 
law 
firms can secure. reliance on state-initiated 
enforcement of labor rights is often in vain, 
where  agencies  of  the  state  are  under-
funded and may lack political will. 

ruhs is correct that advocates tend to focus 
on the rights of present migrants as opposed 
to  possible  future  migrants.  whether  it 
would  be  desirable  to  expand  regulated 
temporary  worker  programs  in  the  us
if  working  conditions  were 
improved 
and  regulations  enforcedis  a  long-term 
policy  discussion 
involving  us-based 
migrants and advocates. insofar as migrant 
associations, particularly from mexico and 
central  america,  can  engage  their  home 
country governments in discussions about 
the  conditions  that  produce  emigration, 
so  much  the  better.    discussions  must 
also  include  a  long-term  labor  market 
analysis  about  issues  affecting  all  us 
workers.  these  issues  include:  precarity; 
outsourcing;  technological  advances  and 
other  factors  which  affect  labor  needs; 
informality  and  independent  contracting; 
campaigns to raise the minimum wage to 
a living wage; loss of trade union rights 
(and expansion of so-called right to work 
laws);  and  how  future  migrants  might  fit 
into the market.

and  promoting 

governments  are  reluctant  to  engage  in 
serious discussions of migrants as rights-
bearers. at the closing plenary session of 
the 2009 gfmd, the head of the mexican 
government  delegation  declared 
that 
human  rights  would  be  a  major  theme 
of  the  2010  gfmd  meeting  in  mexico: 
mexico  is  committed  to  work  in  an 
inclusive,  transparent  manner,  building 
bridges 
international 
cooperation,  while  giving  a  central  role 
to  the  respect  for  human  rights,  a  shared 
responsibility (gfmd 2009, 44). by the 
time of the 2010 global forum in mexico, 
human  rights  had  been  dropped  as  a 
theme, replaced by human development, 
much to the disappointment of civil society 
and  migrant  observers.  in  successive 
gfmd  meetings  and  at  the  2013  un 
high  level  dialogue  on  international 
migration and development, civil society 
and  migrant  observers  have  continued  to 
insist on a frank and honest discussion of 
human  rightsa    discussion  which  has 
been  repeatedly  frustrated.    hopefully 
ruhs  provocative  book  will  help  begin 
that discussion.        

