the human cost of iirira  
stories from  
individuals impacted by the 
immigration detention system

saba ahmed, esq.

adina appelbaum, esq.

rachel jordan, esq.

executive summary
the  1996  passage  of  the  illegal  immigration  reform  and  immigrant 
responsibility act (iirira) has had a devastating impact on immigrants 
who  are  detained,  indigent,  and  forced  to  face  deportation  proceedings 
without  representation  (pro  se).  in  the  past  20  years,  immigration 
detention has grown exponentially and a criminalimmigration detention
deportation pipeline has developed as a central function of the immigration 
system. despite the growing specter of the criminal alien in the american 
psyche, there is little public knowledge or scrutiny of the vast immigration 
detention and deportation machine. enforcement of iirira has effectively 
erased human stories and narrowed immigration debates to numbers and 
statistics. 
the five vignettes below tell the stories of individuals who have personally 
experienced  the  impact  of  iirira.  part  1  describes  the  on-the-ground 
reality  of  a  state  public  defenders  obligations  and  struggles  to  defend 
immigrants  from  harsh  consequences  of  criminal  convictions.  part  2 
provides the perspective of an indigent immigrant fighting his deportation 
pro se. part 3 describes a nonprofit immigration attorneys challenges in 
providing legal services to detained immigrants. part 4 is a glimpse into the 
brisk pace of an immigration judges detained docket. part 5 tells the story 
of a detained immigrants family member and the many hoops she must 
jump  through  to  ensure  he  has  a  fighting  chance  in  immigration  court. 
collectively, these vignettes provide a realistic picture of the immigration 
detention experience, revealing the human cost of iirira. 

introduction
since its passage in 1996, the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility 
act  (iirira)  has  had  a  devastating  impact  on  immigrants  who  are  indigent,  detained, 

 2017 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 5 number 1 (2017): 194-216and  forced  to  face  deportation  proceedings  without  representation  (pro  se).  iiriras 
criminalization of the immigration system has funneled millions of immigrants through 
a  massive  criminal  immigration  deportation  pipeline.  iirira  expanded  the  number  of 
criminal offenses that trigger deportation, detain immigrants without possibility of bond, 
and bar them from legal defenses against deportation. as a result, the united states now 
operates the worlds largest immigration detention system (global detention project 2016). 
over 40,000 immigrants are detained by the department of homeland security (dhs) on 
any given day (barrett 2016). they are detained under conditions set by immigration and 
customs  enforcement  (ice)  and  by  customs  and  border  protection  (cbp),  with  little 
review from outside entities. 
despite increased public awareness of the civil rights violations undergirding the mass 
criminal  incarceration  epidemic  in  america,  stories  of  detained  immigrants,  the  over-
burdened legal service providers and judicial employees who work to ensure their due 
process rights, and the impact of detention on the family members of detainees remain 
largely  hidden  from  the  public.  meanwhile,  the  institutional  foundation  of  iirira  has 
spurred  public  discourse  that  embraces  the  criminalization  of  immigration,  recently 
culminating in the 2016 election of a president whose campaign explicitly centered on 
portraying immigrants as criminals and carrying out mass deportations. 
this  article  reveals  the  daily  toll  iirira  takes  on  individuals  who  play  a  role  in  the 
detention-deportation pipeline. it presents five separate vignettes that illustrate important 
systemic  challenges  and  reveal  the  viewpoints  of  different  actors  within  the  system:  a 
public defender who must defend immigrant clients against the deportation consequences 
of criminal charges; a detained, indigent immigrant who must navigate the complex system 
from a remote jail without the assistance of a lawyer; a nonprofit legal service provider who 
serves as the sole source of legal information for immigrants who cannot afford private 
representation; an immigration judge who adjudicates the fates of detained immigrants in 
an over-burdened immigration court; and a detained immigrants family member who faces 
permanent separation from a loved one. in light of the new administrations alarmingly 
anti-immigrant stance, these human costs of iirira can no longer be ignored.

part i: the public defender
in  2010,  14  years  after  iirira,  the  us  supreme  court  issued  the  landmark  decision 
padilla  v.  kentucky,  in  which  it  acknowledged  the  explosive  increase  in  deportations 
based  on  criminal  convictions.1  the  court  recognized  that  deportation  is  more  than  a 
mere collateral consequence of a criminal conviction, stating that [d]eportation is an 
integral part  indeed, sometimes the most important part  of the penalty that may 
be imposed on noncitizen defendants who plead guilty to specified crimes.2 because of 
the severity of deportation, the court found that an immigrant in criminal proceedings is 
entitled to accurate legal advice from her criminal defense attorney about the immigration 
consequences of her criminal charges. 
padilla accommodates the post-iirira joining of the immigration and criminal justice 
systems by laying the duty on criminal defense attorneys to understand and alleviate the 
1   padilla v. kentucky, 559 u.s. 356 (2010).
2   id, 364.

195

the human cost of iiriradisproportionate impact of criminal convictions on immigrants. public defenders and court-
appointed attorneys are already overburdened by gross inequities in the criminal justice 
system, and have few resources to bear the additional obligation of providing accurate and 
specific advice about the immigration consequences of criminal pleas. such advice requires 
ongoing training on the complicated nexus of federal immigration and state criminal law. 
most states have yet to implement a system providing training or resources on immigration 
law for indigent defense providers, leaving many defense attorneys without the necessary 
infrastructure to fulfill their padilla obligations. 
even where indigent criminal defense attorneys are provided immigration law training, there 
is often little they can do to protect their clients against deportation. iirira categorized a 
broad variety of crimes as triggers for deportation and mandatory detention (torrey 2015). 
defense  attorneys  are  tasked  with  explaining  to  their  clients  that  simple  misdemeanor 
offenses  like  shoplifting  or  marijuana  possession  can  lead  to  grossly  disproportional 
consequences  under  immigration  law,  such  as  mandatory  and  indefinite  detention  and 
possible banishment from their communities. 
below, a public defender recounts these tensions in indigent criminal defense.

*****

as a public defender, 3 i witnessed firsthand the incredible power of the government and the 
inequity of enforcement. the jurisdiction in which i practiced was very diverse; i met and 
represented people from almost every ethnic background and most corners of the globe. 
yet, despite crime statistics consistently showing that each demographic group has roughly 
the  same  incidence  of  criminality  (except  for  immigrants,  who  are  actually  less  likely 
to commit crimes), the majority of my docket was filled with minority clients. most of 
them had been beaten down and targeted by the justice system for most of their lives. 
my minority clients were all too often stripped of individuality and treated by judges and 
prosecutors as mere symbols of poverty and dysfunction. 
most vulnerable among my clients were those not born in this country. with or without 
lawful status, they were at the bottom of the totem pole, deemed illegal by virtue of their 
very presence. the scorn of the state, from the bench or the prosecution, is enflamed when 
dealing with noncitizens. this biased treatment magnifies the consequences of iirira and 
creates a system in which immigrants are punished twice for a single offense. 
thankfully,  my  office  was  fairly  progressive  in  training  and  implementing  the  padilla 
standards. we  learned  about  the  unequal  impact  a  conviction  has  on  a  noncitizen,  and 
sought  to  mitigate  those  consequences.  we  were  at  the  nascent  stages  of  this  pursuit, 
despite the consequences of criminal convictions being well-known in the immigration 
world since 1996. this disconnect spawned from previous rulings of the supreme court 
that held that immigration  consequences were collateral, civil consequences, either not 
important enough or too complex to be considered integral to the criminal case.4 the 2010 

3   ashley r. shapiro is an immigration resource attorney with the virginia indigent defense commission who 
advises public defender offices throughout virginia on the immigration consequences of criminal convictions. 
prior to that, she worked for four years as a public defender in virginia and maryland.
4   fong yue ting v. united states, 149 u.s. 698 (1893).

196

journal on migration and human securitypadilla decision rocked the defense world and marked a sea change in criminal defense. 
panic ensued when the ruling came out. how could we learn enough immigration law to 
understand what would happen to our clients after they left our care in criminal court? 
suddenly the advice you should talk to an immigration attorney, this conviction might 
have consequences, was, by itself, woefully inadequate, even malpractice. 
because the majority of people caught in the criminal system are indigent, this burden 
fell heavily on public defenders and court-appointed attorneys with already demanding 
caseloads. the expansion of the criminal grounds of deportability disproportionally affected 
our indigent clients, people already targeted by our prejudiced system and now subject 
to vastly disparate consequences. i was fortunate to practice in a metropolitan area, and 
was trained repeatedly in immigration consequences. but most attorneys do not have such 
resources available to them and are ill-prepared to deal with noncitizen clients, even if they 
have the best intentions. some attorneys are recalcitrant to expand their existing duties, 
and still dont think it should be their job to investigate and learn about an entirely new set 
of laws. some are just so overloaded with cases that they believe they dont have the time 
to learn or can do just the bare minimum. many indigent clients simply end up deported, 
never realizing they had a right to be advised about the dire immigration consequences in 
advance of taking a criminal plea. iirira changed the landscape of criminal defense, and 
it has been a slow process getting defense attorneys to live up to their legal obligations. 
immigration law is complex, with harsh consequences for something as minor as petty 
shoplifting. i believe padilla was correctly decided and brought much-needed changes, 
but that doesnt diminish the immense pressure it placed on criminal defense attorneys to 
learn the wide array of consequences their clients could face. the intricate web of triggers 
and bars can baffle even a practicing immigration attorney. together with the lack of a right 
to counsel in immigration court, this makes the duty of a criminal defense attorney all the 
more burdensome. it is daunting to be responsible for a whole area of law outside your 
general practice. it is even more daunting to recognize that even the hardest-fought plea 
deal in criminal court cannot avoid devastating immigration consequences for a noncitizen 
defendant. 
as public defenders, we learned as much as we could about immigration consequences 
in the hopes of negotiating better outcomes for our clients, or at least fully explaining all 
of the consequences of a plea offer so that they could make an informed decision about 
their criminal case. explaining these complex consequences to a client, especially with a 
language barrier, is a difficult task. the client must be given sufficient information to be 
able to weigh the short-term effect of the criminal case against the long-term immigration 
impact. clients all too often have to choose between whether to give up their right to trial 
in a case they could perhaps win, or the surety of a plea offer. they might have to choose 
a longer jail sentence than is appropriate for their crime, in order to stay in the country 
with their family. public defenders must bear witness to our clients heartache in making 
these choices, for which there is often no right answer. these were some of the hardest 
conversations i had to have as a public defender, and they are a direct consequence of 
iirira greatly expanding the criminal triggers for immigration consequences. 
it is our duty as public defenders to use knowledge of immigration consequences to seek 
more favorable plea offers for our clients, but this is easier said than done. i would often 

197

the human cost of iirirarun  into  a  familiar  refrain  from  prosecutors:  why  should  i  treat  your  client  different 
than a citizen? or why should i care what happens to your client; he shouldnt be here 
anyway? these myopic views ignore the fact that consequences of a criminal punishment 
are doubly magnified for a noncitizen. over time some prosecutors opened up to the idea 
of  negotiating  cases  in  light  of  the  broader  immigration  consequences.  but  many  still 
refuse to consider them, which leaves the client with an impossible choice and reveals 
the fundamental unfairness of the system. an immigrants future rests almost solely on 
the luck of the draw  which prosecutor is assigned the case, and will they be willing to 
consider the full picture?
the same holds true for the bench. some judges entertain sentencing pleas designed to 
mitigate immigration consequences, and others wont. judges are not often trained in the 
complexities of immigration consequences, and their knowledge depends on the defense 
presenting  the  information  to  them. again,  the  burden  falls  on  the  defense  attorney  to 
mitigate the immigration consequences for a noncitizen by educating the judge on them in 
order to seek a sentence that properly addresses those consequences. 
we defense attorneys are not seeking preferential treatment for our noncitizen clients. we 
dont just want to get all the cases dismissed and let immigrants get a free pass, although 
this is what many on the government side believe. rather, it is to level the playing field, 
to not let what is viewed as a small mistake in the criminal system result in catastrophic 
immigration penalties. iirira did not just change the immigration system; together with 
padilla, it changed indigent defense and the way we practice. by placing the burden to 
defend against immigration consequences onto defense attorneys, padilla thankfully added 
a layer of protection that helped to mitigate the heavy impact of iirira. but that impact 
continues to be borne by noncitizens, and the indigent defense attorneys seeking to protect 
them, every day.

part ii: the immigrant detainee
iirira exacerbates the isolation of detained indigent immigrants by limiting access to 
counsel and other due process protections in a civil system of law that has long operated 
on the presumption that noncitizens merit fewer due process protections. the us supreme 
court  has  long  declined  to  enumerate  exactly  which  due  process  protections  attach  to 
immigration  proceedings;  in  fact,  in  many  cases,  due  process  is  whatever  the  federal 
government has decided it is.5 the court has called deportation a deprivation of all that 
makes life worth living6 and a the equivalent of banishment or exile.7 nevertheless, the 
court has affirmed that, although deportation is intimately related to the criminal process, 
it remains a civil process distinct from, and exempt from the same standards as, criminal 
proceedings.8 consequently, despite functioning similarly, immigration proceedings do not 
benefit from the wealth of advocacy and litigation that has secured due process procedural 
protections in criminal proceedings. 

5   ekiu v. u.s, 142 u.s. 651, 660 (1892).
6    ng fung ho v. white, 259 u.s. 276, 287 (1922).
7   fong haw tan v. phelan, 333 u.s. 6, 10 (1948).
8   padilla v. kentucky, 559 u.s. 356 (2010), fong yue ting v. united states, 149 u.s. 698 (1893).

198

journal on migration and human securityperhaps the most important protection lacking in the immigration system is the right to 
appointed counsel. decades ago, the supreme court recognized that due process cannot 
exist in the adversarial criminal justice system without the sixth amendments guarantee 
of counsel. the court upheld this fundamental right for indigent defendants, stating that 
the noble ideal of fair trials before impartial tribunals in which every defendant stands 
equal before the law . . . cannot be realized if the poor man charged with crime has to 
face  his  accusers  without  a  lawyer  to  assist  him.9  by  contrast,  immigration  law  does 
not require court-appointed counsel for indigent immigrants, as counsel is considered a 
privilege afforded to a noncitizen, not a right.10 accordingly, 63 percent of immigrants 
in immigration court are unrepresented (eagly and shafer 2015, 19). when detained, only 
14 percent of immigrants secure counsel, leaving 86 percent with no option but to defend 
against their deportation pro se in opposition to a trained government lawyer (ibid,30). 
detention  itself  has  a  significant  impact  on  an  individuals  ability  to  afford  and  access 
counsel: non-detained immigrants are five times more likely to have lawyers than detained 
immigrants (ibid, 32).
considering the recent mass expansion of the detention system, the numbers of pro se 
detained  immigrants  are  growing  exponentially  (barrett  2016).  with  so  few  of  them 
represented,  the  vast  majority  cannot  even  protect  their  most  basic,  limited  rights  in 
immigration court, and will be deported without a fair hearing.11
below, a longtime legal permanent resident recounts his ongoing fight against deportation 
without representation.

*****

after  being  detained  for  over  21  months12  by  immigration  authorities  in  deplorable 
conditions while fighting my deportation, placed in solitary confinement, forcibly removed 
from the country, and redetained after my case was reopened, i can personally say that the 
immigration system i have experienced is a shame and disgrace for people who are caught 
in it.
the united states has been my home for 20 years. i have only lived here lawfully. when 
i was a young child, i came to the united states as a lawful permanent resident with my 
family. i graduated high school with honors. my commitment to this nation and its values 
runs deep. i am a us war veteran. i fought and sacrificed for this country in iraq during 
operation enduring freedom and operation iraqi freedom. 
my troubles began years ago after i made some wrong decisions in my life, and i was 
convicted for possessing with intent to distribute a small amount of cocaine and possessing 

9   gideon v. wainwright, 372 u.s. 335, 344 (1963).
10   8 u.s.c.a.  1229a(b)(4)(a).
11   bridges v. wixon, 326 u.s. 135, 154 (1945), recognizing that deportation visits a great hardship on the 
individual and deprives him of the right to stay and live and work in this land of freedom and cautioning 
that care must be exercised lest the procedure by which he is deprived of that liberty not meet the essential 
standards of fairness.
12   this is an account written in collaboration with a pro se individual who is a longtime lawful permanent 
resident of the united states. his name is not disclosed for confidentiality purposes, as his legal case is 
ongoing.

199

the human cost of iiriraa firearm. ice placed me in removal proceedings and told me that i was in mandatory 
detention without eligibility for bond. i did not have the option to both fight my deportation 
and enjoy my right to liberty. 
unable to work while detained, i had no money to hire a private attorney. the immigration 
judge  gave  me  a  list  of  organizations  that  supposedly  provided  legal  representation  at 
low or no cost for indigent respondents like me. i called every single organization listed, 
desperate to find a lawyer to fight my case. not a single one was able to help me. most of 
them did not answer my calls. for those who answered, none of them would take my case 
pro bono. the list was useless. because of my extensive efforts to access a pro bono lawyer 
from detention, my immigration case and my detention were prolonged for over a year. i 
had no option but to fight my case by myself while detained, against a trained government 
attorney. compared to many detainees i was fortunate, because i speak english and had 
some education from finishing high school. but i lacked any legal training or knowledge 
of us immigration laws.
the very few materials that the immigration detention center in farmville, virginia provided 
for people forced to represent themselves were outdated. access to state law materials are 
essential to mount any defense against deportation triggered by a conviction, and most 
detainees at my detention center were being deported because of a virginia conviction and 
would have benefitted from access to virginia state legal materials. however, the detention 
center law library did not have a single state law book or statute. i felt helpless against 
the ice attorney, who could cite the latest case law to support the argument to deport me. 
there was almost no point in defending myself. i was at a complete disadvantage.
the law told me i was not in detention to be punished. but i was forced to live in the most 
intolerable conditions imaginable. the food was disgusting and there was never enough, 
forcing us to go hungry and spend any money we had in our detainee accounts to buy 
products from the commissary store. phone calls to our family members were insanely 
expensive  we were charged a dollar per minute to call outside the centers area code. 
once, along with other detainees, i refused to eat in protest of the deplorable conditions. 
as a result of my peaceful protest i was taken to a holding cell where i was kept for days 
without a shower. then i was placed into solitary confinement for 30 days for inciting a 
demonstration. i did not deserve those horrid days in solitary. 
at one point i was transferred to rappahannock county jail, a facility with even crueler 
conditions. the staff treated us like animals. we faced lockdowns for at least 20 hours daily. 
during lockdown i had no ability to leave the small cell i shared with another detainee. 
the cell had a toilet inside, and during lockdown we were forced to go without showers 
and eat our meals in the same place we went to the bathroom. i truly believe the food 
was not meant for human consumption. if we complained about the conditions, we faced 
punishment of lockdown for 72 hours. when i tried to communicate with my deportation 
officer,  the  facility  put  me  on  suicide  watch,  where  i  was  stripped  naked  before  being 
forced to wear heavy, confining clothes, then abandoned to the living hell of a small, bare 
cell with no toilet, sink, or bed. there was nothing inside it but a hole in one corner where i 
was supposed to go to the bathroom. there was no way to flush or wash my hands, though 
i had to eat with my hands because they gave me no utensils. i had to sleep like a dog on 
the concrete floor. 

200

journal on migration and human securityi was not a human being. no human being in modern civilization is meant to endure these 
conditions. certainly not in the united states of america, whose freedom i had proudly 
fought for.
i lost my case. the judge failed to correctly apply the complex and fast-evolving criminal 
immigration law, which changes by the day in higher courts. i appealed to the board of 
immigration appeals (bia), knowing the decision was legally wrong, and lost again. i 
filed a motion to reconsider, but while it was pending the government deported me to a 
place where i knew no one.
after being exiled, i learned that the board had reconsidered and sent my case back to 
the immigration judge for further analysis. desperate to attend my hearing to fight for my 
rights, i attempted to reenter at the border checkpoint seven times and explain my situation 
to officials, though i knew doing so would mean being detained again upon entry. on the 
seventh attempt, a fellow us army veteran working for us border patrol agreed to let me 
in to be detained and continue fighting my case.
for months i stayed detained again, struggling to navigate the complex area of criminal 
immigration law without access to counsel or legal resources. throughout this entire time, 
i remained separated from my family. finally, i was able to get bond to be released from 
detention.
to this day, i continue to fight my case pro se, hoping for the opportunity to have the law 
applied fairly. refusing to give up, i have submitted numerous briefs to the immigration 
court explaining how the law does not permit my deportation. at any moment the courts 
can order me deported again. each day, when i feel the tightness of the ankle bracelet that 
ice has forced me to wear, i am reminded of the grave uncertainty of my future, my liberty, 
and my ability to remain with my family in the only place i have ever called home.
most  detainees  are  not  as  lucky  as  i  have  been  to  get  this  second  chance.  every  day, 
numerous people are deported to places where they face persecution and death. the united 
states government praises itself on providing a fair and just opportunity for immigrants 
to defend ourselves against removal. but that system is a sham. most of us face detention 
without access to counsel, inhumane detention conditions, and permanent separation from 
our families and our homes.

part iii: the nonprofit immigration attorney
as the number of detained immigrants has grown exponentially in the past two decades, 
one of the largest challenges of the detention system has been access to counsel. while 
accessing  legal  services  is  difficult  for  anyone  in  detention,  immigration  advocates 
nationwide face the added challenge of accessing detained immigrants. over the past two 
decades, advocates and attorneys have fought just to access immigration detention centers. 
the access they have gained has been closely monitored and regulated by ice, such that 
the services they can provide are limited. 
currently,  some  nonprofit  legal  service  organizations  have  access  to  some,  but  not  all, 
immigration detention centers. they are able to conduct know-your-rights presentations 

201

the human cost of iirirainside detention centers, distilling complicated law and procedure into easily communicable, 
bite-size pieces of information in a matter of minutes for detainees. these nonprofit attorneys 
and other service providers then help identify immigrants in need of legal representation 
and, if possible, connect them with pro bono attorneys. an immigrants access to pro bono 
counsel depends on the strength of each local nonprofit organizations efforts to cultivate a 
network of pro bono attorneys, as well as the location of the detention center. while know-
your-rights presentations provide a measure of legal access, they stop short of providing 
representation to detained immigrants in immigration court  the single most important 
factor affecting an immigrants chances of winning relief in removal proceedings. detained 
immigrants who cannot afford private immigration attorneys are particularly impacted by 
the lack of access to legal information. former attorney general eric holder declared 
in 2010 that immigrant access to attorneys should be recognized as part of an indigent 
defense crisis and, in the same breath, hailed the provision of general legal information as 
a great success story (holder 2010) .
immigrants  rights  advocates  are  torn  about  the  limited  access  to  detention  centers  for 
which they have fought for the past two decades. know-your-rights presentations may be 
the only form of legal access for tens of thousands of immigrants, especially those in remote 
detention  facilities.  nonprofit  attorneys  who  provide  this  service  know  that  such  well-
intentioned efforts usually do not lead to pro bono representation, may actually encourage 
immigrants to accept deportation if their case is winnable but difficult, and may impede 
the growing movement for universal representation in immigration court by serving as a 
stopgap of due process that legitimizes a broken system.
below, a nonprofit attorney describes the struggle and challenge of providing legal services 
to detained immigrants.

*****

the visit13

the heavy metal door slams shut behind me and i am trapped, automatic doors surrounding 
me on either side. i wait patiently in full view of the security camera, hoping to hear the 
telltale click and buzz that will allow us to push our way out of this claustrophobic hallway. 
i  follow  the  correctional  officer  down  the  hall  to  the  first  block. a  ring  of  theatrically 
oversized jail keys jangles at his hip. it is already hot and humid this morning and the 
temperature will soar to well over 100 degrees this afternoon in the jail. the administrative 
offices are cool, but im told that air conditioning is just not an option in the cells  it 
would cost too much.
an automated door of metal bars slides open to let me into block 1. in front of me are two 
levels of cells, each cell guarded by its own metal door. to my right, a row of metal bars 
leads me into the day room: a small tv in one corner and four metal picnic benches bolted 
down the middle. massive, industrial-size fans futilely blow hot air, adding to the noise and 
frustration of the 20 men in front of me.

13  saba ahmed is a staff attorney with a nonprofit organization that provides limited legal services on a pro 
bono basis to detained immigrants. 

202

journal on migration and human securityi launch into my rehearsed introduction: im an immigration attorney but im not here 
to  represent  you.  im  only  here  to  provide  information  about  immigration  law  and  the 
deportation process and orient you to your case. rapt attention. you are here because the 
government is trying to deport you. sometimes there are ways to fight against a deportation. 
if you do not have an attorney, we can speak with you to see if you qualify for a legal 
defense against deportation. i look down at my list of four names of new detainees that ice 
gave us earlier this week, then up at all the men in front of me. per usual, our information 
is incomplete and our attempts to plan out the precious time we have in each block are 
thwarted. i spend a few minutes organizing the men into two groups  those weve spoken 
with before and those who have not yet heard my know-your-rights presentation. our group 
of four  one attorney and some volunteer law students  springs into action, taking 
people aside individually to deliver pamphlets simplifying complex immigration laws.
i  begin  the  know-your-rights  presentation.  this  jail,  despite  what  it  looks  like  and 
feels like, is an immigration detention center; it is not a criminal jail. scoffs, disbelief, 
incomprehension. criminal convictions may affect a persons case in many ways: maybe 
theyre not eligible for bond, maybe the judge will set a bond unattainably high, maybe a 
person wont be eligible for certain defenses, maybe the conviction is so serious that theres 
only a small chance that a person will actually win a defense against their deportation. 
hope drains and attention begins to wander. im careful to always use the third-person 
they or a person and not the second-person you because this is not legal advice; its 
merely a general orientation. by the time ive finished explaining requirements for the 
limited defenses against deportation, few people are hopeful, but they still want to speak 
with an attorney who can explain the details of their case.
each member of our team has five to 10 minutes to speak with a detained immigrant who 
doesnt already have an attorney. we want to see as many people as we can in the limited 
time were allowed today. i speed through our intake form, knowing i must be thorough 
because it may be weeks before i have a chance to speak with a person again and a single 
missing fact could affect their eligibility for relief. i run through biographical info, how 
the  person  entered  the  united  states,  past  arrests  or  convictions,  family  members  and 
community in the united states, and if and why a person is afraid to go back to their 
country. i am always impressed and sometimes overwhelmed by the level of faith each 
person puts in me, speaking candidly of past persecution and harm in their home country 
or criminal convictions in the united states. im not sure i could muster the same faith or 
courage to bare such things to a stranger in a few minutes.
having spoken with hundreds of detained immigrants and honed my five-minute intake 
skills,  i  am  adept  at  cutting  people  off  if  they  start  describing  horrific  details  of  their 
persecution (i dont need to know how it happened, only that it happened) or that their 
children at home are crying and asking for them (because their children likely wont help 
them qualify for a defense against deportation). ive developed a callous conscience over 
the past two years. on the one hand, i am constrained by the minutes we have in each 
block; on the other hand, i am relieved that i dont have the time to listen because i dont 
know if i can bear any more painful stories.
we trudge from block to block in the jail, repeating this performance five or more times 
through the day. we take a 20-minute lunch and push on. just one more block to go  

203

the human cost of iiriraweve saved the smallest for last. we walk in expecting to see the eight people on our list. 
the officer tells me that there are 26 more immigrants who arrived at the jail a few days 
earlier, but they are not on our list and we cant meet them because theres not enough 
time. in a desperate attempt to provide some form of legal access, i shout down the halls 
at the closed metal doors: we are immigration attorneys! we dont have time to talk to 
you today, but give us a call so we can talk about your case! im leaving papers with our 
phone number! i hand over legal guides and information to the officer but know this is a 
shot in the dark. the free legal hotline that connects immigrant detainees to our office is 
complicated to dial and i know that many wont be able to reach us. most of them will be 
gone by the time we visit again next month.

followup

out through the loud metal doors and into the sunshine. we breathe a collective sigh of 
relief and climb into the car, ready for the three-hour drive home. on a good day, the visit 
and drive takes about 14 hours. our volunteers fall asleep in the back seat, exhausted by 
the pace of the visit. i am energized, the adrenaline rush that started at 5:00 am and kept 
me going through the day will last a few more hours  ill crash when i get home. next 
week, well be off to another county jail cum immigration detention center and another one 
the week after that. for now, theres no sense of accomplishment, only exhaustion. im 
mentally running through the people i met today  who had a strong case? how many 
days do i have to follow up? will it be possible to find a pro bono attorney?
the next day we begin the breakdown of our jail visit. we meet and review every persons 
options under immigration law. we sort through the cases one by one, debating each other 
and debating our consciences on how to proceed with each case. the lucky ones are put on 
a fast track to find a pro bono attorney, a process that generally takes several weeks. the 
unlucky ones  the majority of those we review  are closed with a message: were sorry, 
we see no viable legal relief in your case. you are welcome to consult with another attorney. 
in between, there are the cases which require meticulous fact-gathering to assess if there is 
a chance to fight deportation. we spend the next few days calling family members, digging 
into the facts of a criminal conviction, and gathering evidence. our reviews and follow- 
ups are always completed with a sense of urgency as its impossible to ignore the looming 
risk of deportation. this process is made more difficult by lack of access to the detainees. 
in many cases, we encounter people after they have been detained for weeks or have had 
several court hearings, too late in the process to stop or slow down a deportation.
in between our jail visits, detained immigrants are frustrated in detention and are seeking 
a way to get out. theyll ask for a bond and, when they are denied or cant pay the amount 
set, theyll ask for a deportation. its heartbreaking to go back to jail after following up on 
a case and see someone with a deportation order because they just could not bear any more 
detention. 

fallout

the pace of the jail visit cycles hasnt allowed me much time for reflection on my role in the 
detention-deportation pipeline. ive heard nonprofit attorneys who visit detention centers 

204

journal on migration and human securitydescribed as the public defenders of the immigration system because we are the last line of 
defense for indigent immigrants facing deportation. but this characterization is inaccurate 
because public defenders have far more access to their clients and, more importantly, the 
ability to represent them in court. in contrast, i have very limited access to immigrant 
detainees. our access is always carefully negotiated with dhs to fit the agencys limited 
conception of legal access and due process for immigrants. at any time, dhs can limit the 
length or number of our visits to jail, restrict telecommunication access, or refuse to let us 
know who or how many people are being detained  all of which exacerbate an already 
challenging job.
then there is the moral quandary i grapple with. there is a growing movement for universal 
representation of indigent immigrant adults and children. i cant help but think that the 
limited and general legal services are a band-aid put on this great need  a measure of 
legal access that stops short of actual legal representation, the one thing that actually makes 
a difference in an immigrants chance of winning their case. instead, i add efficiency to 
the clogged immigration courts. this means that pro se detainees may get a bond or win 
their case, but more likely they accept a deportation or ask for voluntary departure, making 
bed  space  for  the  next  detained  immigrant  and  opening  up  a  slot  for  a  hearing  on  the 
immigration judges detained docket. most days i feel like a glorified case manager, not a 
zealous advocate as lawyers should be, but a prop for due process, moving people through 
the pipeline. if i see a case thats a stretch  maybe there is a legal argument to make that 
this crime does not make a person deportable, or maybe the good and bad equities are on 
balance  i cant take on the case and fight. the most i can do is tell the person that if they 
want a fighting chance, they need to pay $5,000, $10,000, or more, for an attorney willing 
to make creative legal arguments. what kind of legal access is that?
there is also the emotional fallout of the job. completing a jail visit means receiving calls 
from desperate immigrant detainees and desperate families. theres a relief i feel when 
someones family scrapes together the thousands of dollars for a private attorney, or when 
someone is no longer detained. whether theyre out on a bond or they were deported, the 
weight of responsibility is lifted; thats one less person for me to track. i am worn down 
with telling people over and over that there is no relief for them, that there is just no room 
for them in our laws or in our country  it doesnt matter that they fear death in the most 
violent country in the world; it doesnt matter that they have young children here. there is 
just no way to fight their deportation. i absorb their anger with the immigration system and 
their grief at losing their family  after all, who else can they talk to; who else will listen 
to their story?
all of this, over and over, hundreds of cases, hundreds of lives, leads to a slow burnout. 
our will and desire to help detained immigrants can only take us so far, no matter how 
young,  idealistic,  and  optimistic  we  start  out.  the  unpredictable  case  load,  the  early 
morning visits, the late evenings, the effects on our partners and families  all of it weighs 
on me. this job is a constant effort to strike the right balance between hope, despair, and 
the motivation to go on. 

205

the human cost of iirirapart iv: the immigration judge
there is widespread consensus that immigration courts are overwhelmed with immense 
caseloads, inadequate staffing, and lengthy backlogs (arnold & porter 2010). non-detained 
immigrants  in  removal  proceedings  often  wait  two  to  three  years  to  have  their  cases 
adjudicated.  cases  on  the  detained  docket  move  much  faster.  despite  the  considerable 
time it takes to access counsel, determine eligibility for defenses to deportation, and gather 
evidence, the average life of a pro se detained immigrants case totals a mere 23 days 
(eagly and shafer 2015, 63).
in addition to facing institutional pressure to quickly move cases while immigrants are 
detained at government expense, judges are overburdened with the number of detained 
cases that must be efficiently adjudicated (lustig et al. 2008). in 2015, immigration judges 
adjudicated and completed 51,005 detained cases, constituting 28 percent of all immigration 
cases completed that year (eoir 2016, figure 11). judges have very little face time with 
immigrants in their courtroom, and about half the time spent with pro se detainees involves 
requests for continuances to seek counsel (eagly and shafer 2015, 61). furthermore, as 
administrative law judges, immigration judges have obligations to the respondents who 
appear pro se and are often required to step into the role of counsel in order to fully develop 
the record through interrogating, examining, and cross-examining an immigrant and any 
witnesses.14
below, a former immigration judge provides a snapshot of a few minutes on the detained 
docket.

*****

prelude15

wednesday afternoon, detained master calendar. feeling love and dread. love: fast-paced, 
meaningful,  live  audience,  prepared  attorneys,  challenging  legal  questions,  teamwork, 
mediation, problem solving, saving lives, teaching, performing, drama, positive messages, 
mentoring, full range of life and legal skills in use and on display. dread: hopeless cases, 
sobbing  families,  watching  goodbyes,  not-quite-ready-for-primetime  (nqrfpt) 
attorneys, bad law, missing files, missing detainees, lousy televideo picture of respondent, 
equipment failures, claustrophobic courtroom, clogged dockets, imprisoned by the system, 
due process on the run, stress.

pregame warm-up

how many today, madam clerk?

14   immigration and nationality act (ina)  240(b)(1).
15   this account is written by hon. paul wickham schmidt, who served as the chairman of the board of 
immigration appeals before being appointed to the arlington immigration court in may 2003, where he 
served as an immigration judge for 13 years before recently retiring from that position. while the names he 
has provided in this account are entirely fictional, the situations he describes are based on his own wealth of 
experience adjudicating cases in immigration court.

206

journal on migration and human securityfourteen, five bonded, two continued.
thanks, madam clerk. lets make it happen!

showtime. 

politeness, patience, kindness. listen.
please rise, the united states immigration court at arlington virginia, is now in session, 
honorable paul wickham schmidt, presiding.
jam-packed  with  humanity.  live.  uncomfortably  hot.  bandbox  courtroom.  ratcheting 
tensions. americas most important, most forgotten courts. lots of moving pieces. put folks 
at ease. performance begins.

the damned

were on the record. this is judge paul wickham schmidt at the united states immigration 
court in arlington, virginia; were on a televideo hookup with the dhs farmville detention 
center, the date is . . . , and this is a master calendar removal hearing in the case of ricardo 
caceres, file number a123 456 789. counsel, please identify yourselves for the record.
bonnie baker for the respondent, mr. caceres.
april able for the dhs.
what are we here for ms. baker?
your honor, were seeking a reasonable bond for my client, who has been in the united 
states for more than two decades. hes a family man, the sole support of his wife and four 
us citizen children, who are sitting right behind me. hes a skilled carpenter with a secure 
job. he pays his taxes. hes a deacon at his church. his employer is here this afternoon and 
is willing to post bond for him. the respondents wife is out of work, and the family is on 
the verge of being evicted from their apartment. the oldest son and daughter are having 
trouble in school ever since their father was detained. the baby has developed asthma and 
cries all night.
i assume hes in detention for a reason, ms. baker. what is it?
well, your honor, he had a very unfortunate incident with one of his co-workers that 
resulted in his one and only brush with the law. i think he probably got some questionable 
legal advice, too.
whats the conviction?
aggravated assault with a deadly weapon.
sentence?
18 months, with all but three months suspended, your honor.

207

the human cost of iirirahmmm. doesnt sound very promising. whats your take, ms. able?
hes  an  aggravated  felon,  your  honor,  under  the  bia  and  fourth  circuit  case  law. 
therefore, hes a mandatory detainee. may i serve the records of conviction?
yes, thank you ms. able. isnt ms. able right, ms. baker? hes mandatory detained under 
the applicable law, isnt he?
well, your honor, technically that might be right. but were asking you to exercise your 
humanitarian discretion in this extraordinary situation. 
as you know, ms. baker, im not a court of equity. the law gives me no discretion here. so, 
based on what youve presented, no bond. whats next? are you admitting and conceding 
removability and filing for relief?
the family wanted me to ask for bond, your honor.
you did, ms. baker. whats the next step?
well, the respondent has instructed me that if you didnt grant a bond, he just wants a final 
order to go back to mexico. hes been in detention for some time now, and he just cant 
wait any longer. 
youre sure thats what mr. caceres wants to do?
yes, your honor. 
mr. caceres, this is judge schmidt, can you hear me?
yes.
because of the crime you committed, the law doesnt permit me to set a bond for you. 
your lawyer, ms. baker, tells me that you have decided to give up your rights to a full 
hearing and be removed to mexico. is that correct?
yes, your honor. i cant stand any more detention.
you understand that this is a final decision, and that once i enter the order you will be 
removed as soon as dhs can make arrangements.
yes, judge, i understand.
and, youve discussed this with your family, sir?
i just want to go  no more detention. can i go tomorrow?
probably not. but the assistant chief counsel and dhs officer in court are noting that you 
want to go as soon as can be arranged.
your honor, may his wife and children come up and see him for a moment?
yes, of course, ms. baker. please come on up folks.
your honor, the respondents wife would like to make a statement to the court.

208

journal on migration and human securityi dont think thats prudent, ms. baker. shes already hysterical, and there is nothing i 
can do about the situation, as im sure youll explain to her. we have lots of other people 
waiting to see me this afternoon.
understood. thanks, your honor.
youre welcome, ms. baker. you did the best you could. take care folks. im sorry youre 
in this situation. mr. caceres, good luck to you in mexico. please stay out of trouble. the 
clerk will issue the final order. whos next, madam clerk?

the not-quite-ready-for-prime-time (nqrpt) lawyer 
mr. queless, were here for your filing of the respondents asylum application.
um, your honor, im sorry i dont have it with me. i didnt have a chance to get to it.
whys that, mr. queless? your client has been in detention for some time now, and i gave 
you a generous continuance to get this done.
thats very true, your honor, but the power was off at our office for a day, and my son 
crashed his car and i had to take care of the insurance and the repairs.
all right, come back in three weeks with your filing, without fail.
can i come back next week, your honor? my client has been in detention a long time.
i know that, counsel. thats why i wanted you to file today, so we could set an individual 
date. im already overbooked for next week, and i cant justify putting you in front of 
others who are prepared.
ah, could we just set an individual date now, your honor, and ill promise to file within 
a week?
that sounds like a really bad idea, mr. queless, in light of actual performance to date. 
i want to see the completed filing before i assign the individual date. thats how we do 
things around here. youve been around long enough to know that.
excuse me, your honor, but may i be heard?
yes, you may, ms. able.
with due respect, your honor, at the last master calendar you said this would be the final 
continuance. this detained case has been pending for months, and you have given counsel 
a more than reasonable opportunity to file for relief. at this point, the dhs must request 
that you deny any further continuance and move that you enter an order of removal.
well,  i  sympathize  with  your  position,  ms.  able.  i  did  say  this  would  be  the  last 
continuance, and im as frustrated as you are. but i note that the respondent is from a 
country where we routinely grant asylum, often by agreement or with no objection from 
your office. therefore, i feel that we must get to the merits of his claim. lets do this. mr. 
queless, im going to give you an incentive to get this filed. if the i-589 is not complete 

209

the human cost of iiriraand ready to file at the next hearing  no more excuses, no more dog ate my homework 
 im going to agree with ms. able, grant her motion, and enter an order of removal 
against your client. do you understand?
yes, your honor. ill have it here at the master in three weeks.
 anything further from either counsel?
nothing from the dhs, your honor.
nothing from the respondent, your honor.
hearing is continued.

the skeptic

how are you this afternoon, mr. garcia?
okay.
spanish your best language?
yes.
is this your first appearance before me?
yes.
youre going to look for a lawyer before we proceed with your case?
do i need a lawyer, judge?
depends on what you want, mr. garcia. i can send you back to guatemala at government 
expense or give you voluntary departure if you wish to pay your own way and avoid having 
a formal removal order on your record. is that what you want?
oh, no, judge. i dont want to go back.
then, you need a lawyer, sir. officer, please give mr. garcia the legal services list. mr. 
garcia, this is a list of organizations in virginia that might be willing to represent you at 
little or no charge if you cant afford a lawyer. you should also check with family and 
friends to see if they can help you find a free or low-cost lawyer to take your immigration 
case. ill set your case over for three weeks to give you a chance to look.
can i come back next week?
you wont be able to find a lawyer by then, sir. take the three weeks. if you dont have a 
lawyer by then, well go forward without one.
okay, your honor.
good luck in finding a lawyer, mr. garcia. the clerk will issue the notices. whos next, 
madam clerk?

210

journal on migration and human securitypostlude

out  of  court.  satisfied.  tired.  drained    like  a  steph  curry  three-pointer.  find  my 
colleagues. fresh air. walk in the park. talk sports, politics, weather. visit starbucks. final 
refill. recharge batteries. master tomorrow morning. fifty non-detained. too many. the 
beat goes on. walking free. not an alien. glad. lucky. thankful. 

part v: the family member
beyond individual immigrants, iirira has a rippling effect on the families of immigrants. 
the detention and deportation system treats the children, spouses, parents, brothers, and 
sisters of immigrants as a mere afterthought, collateral damage to the mission of enforcing 
immigration laws. but the impact of losing a loved one through this system is harshly felt 
by family members and its social effects reverberate throughout the larger community.
the  heaviest  impact  is  borne  by  the  children  of  immigrant  parents,  who  are  primarily 
apprehended  through  the  criminal  justice  system.  in  addition  to  the  many  us  citizen 
children of lawful permanent residents facing deportation, an estimated 4.5 million us 
citizen children have an undocumented parent at risk of detention and deportation (koball 
et al. 2015, 1). these children are more likely to drop out of school, rely on welfare, and 
require foster care if a parent is deported. children who are separated from one or both 
parents due to deportation face emotional devastation and an increased risk of dropping out 
of school or ending up within the criminal justice system, which have lifelong implications 
for  earning  potential  and  welfare  costs  (vasquez  2011,  669-670;  new york  immigrant 
family  unity  project  2013,  12).  for  indigent  families,  particularly  those  with  young 
children, deportation forces reliance on public welfare benefits.
for family members trying to support loved ones in immigration detention, the task is 
bewildering, especially for indigent families whose situation is exacerbated by the detention 
of  the  familys  primary  breadwinner.  many  families  exhaust  their  limited  resources 
hiring private criminal defense attorneys and then cannot pay for immigration attorneys. 
phone calls from remote, rural immigration detention centers are exorbitantly expensive, 
preventing  basic  communication  between  detainees  and  their  families.  for  prolonged 
periods, families are faced with the imminent threat of being torn apart. this is the most 
heartbreaking consequence of iirira.
below, an immigrants wife provides her experience with a loved one detained thousands 
of miles away.

*****

omar and i16 met over a year ago, when i was visiting washington, dc for work. omar 
was working at a store i happened to wander into, and we instantly connected. from first 
sight, our chemistry was electrifying, and after spending more time together we learned we 
had so much in common. omar told me he had recently moved to the united states after 

16   this account was written by the us citizen fiance (now wife) of an immigrant detainee who chose 
not to reveal her name or that of her spouse, as his immigration case is ongoing. throughout the account 
pseudonyms have been used to protect their identities.

211

the human cost of iiriraworking in dubai, though he was originally from morocco. he wanted to stay in the united 
states permanently for education and career opportunities, and was living with his brother, 
a lawful permanent resident, in washington, dc. he was thrilled to be in america, with 
all of its opportunities, and wanted to go to school for engineering. over the next several 
months our bond grew stronger and i was amazed at how quickly omar adapted to us 
culture. he made friends everywhere he went  he just had that effect on people. he was 
so kind and smart, it wasnt long before i fell in love with him. at some point, we started 
to discuss our future together and getting married one day. we knew it wouldnt be easy. 
we come from completely different cultural identities  he is a moroccan muslim and i 
am african american, raised in a christian household. we knew it might be a challenge 
for our families to believe in our bond, but we had no doubt that if they saw our love, they 
would get on board.
many months later, omar was arrested at his job. this horrible news was not delivered to 
me until a few weeks after it happened. i was in los angeles, at work, when i got the call 
one day from omars brother. i hadnt heard from omar in a couple of weeks, which was 
unlike him. his brother kept me in the dark. he said omar would call me later that night and 
told me to make sure i was available to answer. i was furious omar would wait this long to 
update me. i was also incredibly worried about him. i waited and waited for his call  so 
long, in fact, that i fell asleep and missed his first call, which went to voicemail. thankfully 
he quickly called again. my anger dissipated as we spoke, replaced by desperation. he 
told  me  he  was  in  an  immigration  detention  center  in  farmville,  virginia,  after  being 
arrested two weeks ago under suspicion for using a credit card that wasnt his. he was 
innocent  and  planned  to  fight  the  charge,  a  case  of  mistaken  identity.  but  the  moment 
he paid bail and was released from county jail, two immigration officials were waiting 
for him in the waiting room. they rearrested him and took him to immigration detention 
because he had overstayed his entry visa. now, he was waiting in detention until he could 
see the immigration judge. they were trying to deport him. his brother was looking for an 
immigration lawyer to fight his case.
i was full of questions, trying to make sense of the situation and not sure what it meant. 
omar didnt know what it meant himself, but he was calm and loving, trying to stay strong 
and comfort me. he promised that even if they deported him, he was determined for us to 
stay together  he would marry me in another country if he couldnt come back to this one. 
we discussed our faith in god and in each other. i knew that one way or another, i would 
marry this man. the phone call dropped and cut our time together frustratingly short. 
i had so many emotions, but i wasnt worried anymore  i knew omar would get through 
this and we would be together, somehow. omar sounded so confident that he would soon be 
released from immigration detention and that the false criminal charge against him would 
be dropped. in hindsight, it is clear that we were both so very nave about the system he 
had become trapped in.
omars brother hired an immigration attorney to represent him in a bond hearing. none 
of us was prepared for what happened at that first immigration hearing  omar still gets 
upset when he talks about it. the immigration attorney that his brother hired to represent 
omar filed a bond motion, and then the government attorney suddenly claimed that omar 
had sexually assaulted someone. omar was shocked. he had been charged with credit card 

212

journal on migration and human securitytheft, which he was sure was a case of mistaken identity. at the time of his arrest, the police 
had asked him about a sexual assault case and he even took a dna test. the test came back 
negative, which cleared him of any guilt of sexual assault, and he was never charged for 
it. omar knew he could prove his innocence for credit card theft in criminal court once he 
was released from immigration detention. but the ice attorney only told the judge omar 
had been investigated for sexual assault, not that he was innocent based on the result of 
the investigation. even more shocking was that the attorney representing omar did not say 
a word in his defense. the judge denied bond, saying that ices allegations showed that 
omar was dangerous to the community.
omar was stuck in immigration detention. we were desperate  his brother was paying 
for a defense attorney to represent omar on the criminal charge and didnt have any money 
left for an immigration attorney now that the bond had failed. i was living with my parents, 
and looking for a new job, so i could not afford to pay for a lawyer. weeks and then months 
went by, and omar remained in detention. phone calls were hugely expensive. i couldnt 
call him, he could only call me. days would pass and i wouldnt hear from him because 
there was no money on his jail account. each time we were able to talk on the phone, it was 
a blessing. we tried to make the most of those phone calls; it was our only time together. 
we would always comfort each other, but as time stretched on, we got less hopeful. it 
was  depressing  for  omar,  being  in  detention    not  only  the  lack  of  freedom,  but  the 
endless waiting and the horrible uncertainty. he was especially upset about being accused 
of a crime he never committed, and then being denied any chance to prove his innocence. 
he was sure he would be deported. regardless, we still had faith. i was prepared to do 
whatever was necessary to stay together, even if that meant moving to morocco.
we didnt know how to move forward or the steps to take for omars immigration case now 
that bond had been denied, or what was even happening with his criminal case. worst yet, 
we had no idea where to look for concrete information. i started to do some research online 
and found various organizations focused on relief for detained immigrants. i contacted an 
organization based in washington, dc and explained omars situation. one week later, 
i got a call from an immigration attorney from that organization who was familiar with 
omars case. she explained that omars criminal case could not go forward without him 
physically present at the court, and neither ice nor the criminal prosecutor would take 
responsibility  for  transferring  omar  to  criminal  court.  she  explained  that  if  omar  was 
married to a us citizen, he could file a family petition to remain in the united states. 
omar and i wanted to get married, but on our own terms  not to keep him from being 
deported, and not while he was in detention for a crime he didnt commit. when the attorney 
explained the complicated and costly process for getting married in detention, it became 
clear i couldnt do it even if we wanted to  i was dependent on my parents, i didnt have 
the support or resources to travel to virginia, or pay the thousands of dollars in fees to apply 
for omar to get status. i had to be honest  the only way we could get married on such 
short notice was if omar got released on an immigration bond, moved to kansas city, met 
my parents, and got their blessing. i felt like the chance of me climbing mount everest was 
greater than us getting married anytime soon. 
thankfully, that immigration attorney took on omars bond case pro bono, though she 
warned us that chances were slim for omar to be granted bond. by that point, i had received 

213

the human cost of iiriraa position as a literacy tutor for a nonprofit and had funds to travel. i visited omar at the 
detention center in farmville, virginia. i also met other women and families who were 
visiting loved ones. we shared the same feelings: sad but stubbornly optimistic. it was the 
first time in months omar and i had seen each other. all weekend, we discussed our life 
and future together. 
a few days later, omars immigration attorney was able to prove to the immigration judge 
that omar had never been charged with sexual assault. she explained that he deserved 
a chance to prove his innocence on the credit card theft charge in criminal court. when 
the  judge  received  all  the  evidence,  he  changed  his  mind.  finally,  after  six  months  in 
immigration detention, omar was granted release on bond. thank god.
today omar and i are married and living together in kansas city. we have a one-bedroom 
apartment and  are  in  the  process  of  filing  for  his  adjustment of  status.  meanwhile,  his 
criminal case keeps getting continued, though were hopeful it will soon be dismissed  
omar will continue to fight to clear his name and i will continue to support him. every day 
is still a challenge, but we are so blessed. every night is also a reminder that, unlike the 
majority of people whose partners have been detained, i can come home to the man i love. 
we cherish every moment and realize how quickly it can be taken away. there is so much 
in the system that we cannot control, but we refuse for it to control our relationship or make 
us feel helpless. while we may not have faith in the system, we have faith in god, and in 
each other. inshallah, love will prevail.

conclusion
these five vignettes provide a snapshot of the current state of the immigration detention 
and deportation system 20 years post-iirira. iirira laid the legal framework for the easy 
disposal of immigrants who are primarily indigent and people of color. in providing the 
federal government broad leeway in criminalizing and detaining immigrants, iirira has 
cast its net over all immigrants, encouraging their public characterization as objectionable 
and disposable. 
the enforcement of these laws has entrenched the myth of the criminal alien who is 
deserving only of societal ire and deportation. on november 20, 2014, the criminalization 
of immigrants that iirira had woven into the fabric of federal law over the years pushed 
its way forcefully into the public consciousness with three words from president barack 
obama: felons, not families (obama 2014). obama coined this phrase when he issued 
an executive order with the intention of simultaneously appeasing conservatives lobbying 
for more deportations and advocates lobbying for limits on deportations. this concept of 
felons, not families cemented iiriras false delineation of immigrants as either criminal 
convicts or family members, ignoring the obvious reality that almost all individuals have 
families, including those who have been convicted in criminal court and were born outside 
the united states. 
the growing category of individuals legally defined as criminal aliens under iirira, and 
the  subsequent  psychosocial  dehumanization  of  immigrants  as  disposable,  threatening, 
and categorically excludable, has led to where we are in america today. what were once 

214

journal on migration and human securitylegally fictionalized constructs have created new and frightening political realities. taking 
iirira from law to the next level of intentional, overt discrimination, president trump 
ran a presidential campaign centered on fear of the criminal alien caricature, a crude and 
bigoted generalization that quickly caught on with millions of americans. in his speech 
announcing his campaign, trump accused mexican immigrants of embodying the criminal 
alien:  theyre  bringing  drugs.  theyre  bringing  crime.  theyre  rapists.  and  some, 
i  assume,  are  good  people  (lee  2015). after  winning  the  election, trump  echoed  the 
message: what we are going to do is get the people that are criminal and have criminal 
records, gang members, drug dealers, where a lot of these people, probably 2 million  
it could be even 3 million  we are getting them out of our country or we are going to 
incarcerate (cbs 2016).  harping on the fear of the depraved other that iirira set out 
to exclude and expel helped trump to rise to power and fortified the fear of this specter.
perhaps iiriras greatest damage has been shifting blame to the vulnerable population 
that it detains and deports, absolving the deporters of any responsibility. in the eyes of 
the lawful, criminal immigrants lose any claim to membership in society, deserve only 
punishment, and are owed no empathy for permanent separation from their families. the 
trump administration, so outspokenly driven to dehumanize millions of immigrants, is the 
culmination of this 20-year trajectory. under iirira, the foundation was built, and now 
the ugly underbelly has been exposed. these are the stories of the human cost of iirira 
that we ignore at our own social and moral peril.

