us immigration policy and the 
case for family unity

zoya gubernskaya 
university at albany, state university of new york

joanna dreby 
university at albany, state university of new york

executive summary

as  the  trump  administration  contemplates  immigration  reform,  it  is 
important to better understand what works and what does not in the current 
system. this paper reviews and critically evaluates the principle of family 
unity, a hallmark of us immigration policy over the past 50 years and the 
most important mechanism for immigration to the united states. since 
1965, the united states has been admitting a relatively high proportion of 
family-based migrants and allowing for the immigration of a broader range 
of family members. however, restrictive annual quotas have resulted in a 
long line of prospective immigrants waiting outside of the united states 
or within the united states, but without status. further policy changes 
have led to an increasing number of undocumented migrants and mixed-
status  families  in  the  united  states.  several  policies  and  practices 
contribute to prolonged periods of family separation by restricting travel 
and effectively locking in a large number of people either inside or outside 
of the united states. on top of that, increasingly aggressive enforcement 
practices undermine family unity of a large number of undocumented and 
mixed-status families. deportations  and even a fear of deportation  
cause  severe  psychological  distress  and  often  leave  us-born  children  of 
undocumented parents without economic and social support.
a  recent  comprehensive  report  concluded  that  immigration  has  overall 
positive  impact  on  the  us  economy,  suggesting  that  a  predominantly 
family-based migration system carries net economic benefits. immigrants 
rely on family networks for employment, housing, transportation, informal 
financial services, schooling, childcare, and old age care. in the us context 
where there is nearly no federal support for immigrants integration and 
limited welfare policies, family unity is critical for promoting immigrant 
integration, social and economic well-being, and intergenerational mobility.
given the benefits of family unity in the us immigrant context and the 
significant negative consequences of family separation, the united states 
would do well to make a number of changes to current policy and practice 
that reaffirm its commitment to family unity. reducing wait times for family 
reunification  with  spouses  and  children  of  lawful  permanent  residents, 

 2017 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 5 number 2 (2017): 417-430allowing prospective family-based migrants to visit their relatives in the 
united states while their applications are being processed, and providing 
relief from deportation and a path to legalization to parents and spouses 
of us citizens should be prioritized. the cost to implement these measures 
would  likely  be  minor  compared  to  current  and  projected  spending  on 
immigration enforcement and it would be more than offset by the improved 
health and well-being of american families.

us immigration policy and the case for family unity
over  the  span  of  a  few  months,  the  new  administration  has  announced  sweeping 
changes to immigration policy. in his speech to the us congress on february 28, 2017, 
president trump  stated  that  increasing  immigration  enforcement  and  adopting  a  merit-
based immigration system will benefit the country, citing improving jobs and wages and 
strengthening  security  as  top  priorities. at  the  same  time,  trumps  administration  also 
revealed plans to restrict the number of employment-based visas, including h1-b visas 
that are currently the main pathway to the united states for highly skilled foreign-born. at 
this point, it is not clear what the new immigration policy will look like and whether it will 
prioritize family, employment or skilled-based immigration. but the consequences of the 
increased focus on immigration enforcement have been clearly visible across the country. 
under the new guidelines imposed by the administration, all unauthorized immigrants, 
and  those  with  legal  status  who  have  criminal  convictions,  are  eligible  for  deportation 
regardless of familial ties in the united states. while it is not feasible to deport all 11.1 
million unauthorized individuals, such measures amplify the fears of family separation 
among unauthorized immigrants, legal migrants, and us citizens alike. such policies also 
reverse the us commitment to family unity, a hallmark of us immigration policy over 
the past 50 years and the most important mechanism for immigration to the united states. 
in what follows, we review the principle of family unity in us immigration policy and 
some of the current challenges to family unity: prolonged family separations, the increase 
of unauthorized and mixed-status families, and the devastating consequences of current 
enforcement practices. we argue that in the us context with virtually no federal support for 
immigrant integration and limited welfare policies, family unity is critical for promoting 
immigrant integration, social and economic well-being and intergenerational mobility, and 
thus should remain the guiding principle of immigration policy.

a brief overview of family unity
since 1965, family-based immigration has been a cornerstone of us immigration policy. 
while  immigration  policies  of  other  countries  favor  skilled-based  migrants,  the  united 
states  admits  more  immigrants  who  have  family  connections  to  americans  than  any 
other category of migrant. the numerical limits set by the immigration and nationality 
act (ina) of 19651 and expanded by the immigration act of 19902 allow for admission 
of 480,000 family migrants annually, compared to just 140,000 employment-based and 

1   immigration and nationality act, pub. l. no. 89-236, 79 stat. 911. 
2   immigration act of 1990, pub. l. no. 101-649, 104 stat. 4978. 

418

journal on migration and human security55,000 diversity visa lottery immigrants. the law also allows admission of much broader 
categories of relatives compared to other countries immigration systems. besides spouses 
and minor children of us citizens, there are special categories for parents, adult children, 
and  siblings  of  us  citizens,  and  for  spouses  and  minor  children  of  lawful  permanent 
residents (lprs), regardless of their levels of education, occupation, or other skills. as 
a result, family-based migrants constitute roughly 65 percent of the total annual number 
of immigrants to the united states in any given year. in contrast, family-based migrants 
constitute only 30.2 percent of all immigrants to australia, and the vast majority of those 
(83.3%) are spouses of australian citizens (dibp n.d.). in canada, family immigrants are 
less than a quarter of all permanent immigrants (24.4%) with the vast majority (71%) also 
being spouses or partners of canadian citizens (ircc 2015).

figure 1. immigrant admissions to the united states by 
major class

 
 
 
source: dhs (2016, table 6).
as figure 1 shows, about 68 percent of family migrants (or 45% of total) are immediate 
relatives of us citizens, defined as spouses, minor children, and parents, and are admitted 
without numerical limitations under the total 480,000 cap. the rest are unmarried adult 
sons and daughters of us citizens (1st preference); spouses, children, and unmarried adult 
sons and daughters of lprs (2nd preference); married sons and daughters of us citizens 
(3rd preference); and siblings of us citizens (4th preference). immigrant admission under 
the family-preference categories is restricted by the total numerical limit of 226,000 per 
year and by category-specific ceilings as well as country-specific caps. recognizing that 
the adult relatives of us citizens and lprs may have families of their own, the policy 
allows for their immigration. the idea of family unity also exists in the policies governing 
temporary admission, refugee resettlement, and diversity immigration. for example, family 
members can apply for tourist visas together, and dependents visas are issued to spouses 
and minor children of the foreign-born who come to the united states for relatively long 
periods of time on student or work visas. 

419

us immigration policy and the case for family unityprolonged family separation 
despite  explicit  emphasis  on  promoting  family  unity  and  a  number  of  family-friendly 
provisions, the current immigration system is based on certain assumptions about families 
and immigration that may not reflect families lived experiences. for example, the laws 
assume that there is a clear distinction between temporary and permanent migrants; that 
most families are nuclear consisting of a married couple and children; and that there are 
few  immigrants  in  the  process  of  adjustment  of  status,  in  a  temporary  protected  status 
(tps) or completely outside of the legal immigration system (unauthorized). as the result, 
instead  of  promoting  family  unity,  the  current  immigration  system  often  contributes  to 
prolonged periods of family separation (bergeron 2013; enchautegui 2013; enchautegui 
and menjivar 2015; kandel 2016). 
notwithstanding  legal  grounds  for  admission,  the  actual  number  of  visas  available  for 
family preference immigrants is limited, especially for applicants from certain countries. 
setting restrictive numerical quotas and prioritizing certain groups of relatives over others, 
coupled with per country limits, eventually results in backlogs and long waits before families 
are united (bergeron 2013; kandel 2016). the increased demand for immigrant visas was 
partly spurred by the provision of the ina that restricted immigration from the western 
hemisphere. before 1965, anyone born in a north or south american country could apply 
for an immigrant visa without numerical restrictions (and many did); now they are subject 
to numerical caps and have to compete with the foreign-born from all other countries for a 
limited number of visas. given the large flows of migrants since 1965 and especially during 
the 1980s and 1990s, it is not surprising that the wait time for obtaining family-sponsored 
visas has increased dramatically over the years, disproportionately affecting immigrants 
from countries with large applicant pools, such as mexico, philippines, china, and india. 
currently, the wait time for family-sponsored immigrants from most countries varies from 
about two years for the spouses and minor children of lprs to 13 years for siblings and 
adult children of us citizens (dos 2017). but adult children and siblings of us citizens 
born in mexico have to wait more than 20 years to reunite legally with their relatives in the 
united states (ibid.). 
although shorter as compared to other types of family-based immigrants, prolonged wait 
times for lprs to reunite with spouses and minor children (currently approximately two 
years)  is  of  greatest  concern.  research  consistently  documents  negative  and  persistent 
effects  of  separation  from  immediate  family  members  on  the  health  and  well-being  of 
immigrant adults and their children, as we discuss further below (abrego 2014; dreby 
2010; suarez-orozco et al. 2002). ironically, long-term temporary residents can bring their 
spouses and dependent children to the united states relatively quickly by applying for 
dependent visas. but despite the laws supporting family reunification, in practice lprs 
will be separated from their new spouses for the next two to three years.
what makes things worse for families are the restrictions on travel for prospective lprs 
while their petitions are in process. a sharp distinction between temporary visitors and 
permanent migrants built into the current immigration system means that once a petition 
on behalf of a family-sponsored immigrant has been filed, the family-sponsored immigrant 
is no longer eligible for a visitor visa because it would be impossible to prove the absence 
of  the  intent  to  immigrate  permanently,  which  is  one  of  the  conditions  for  receiving  a 

420

journal on migration and human securitytemporary visitor visa. thus, prospective immigrants who are currently abroad are barred 
from visiting family members in the united states for many years. partly in response to 
this, eligible prospective immigrants, family- and employment-based alike, prefer to apply 
for adjustment of their immigration status while in the united states. in fact, more than 
one-half of all new lprs adjust status in the united states (dhs 2016). the adjustment 
time varies depending on the visa availability in specific immigration preference categories. 
despite possible restrictions on travel during the adjustment process, those family-based 
migrants who hold valid temporary visas are usually able to become lprs without leaving 
the united states. for unauthorized family-based migrants, this process involves much 
greater risk of permanent separation as most must return to the country of origin and seek 
approval of a waiver of inadmissibility, which, if denied, can lead to either three-year, 
10-year,  or  permanent bars  to  readmission  (kerwin,  meissner,  and  mchugh  2011).  by 
severely limiting in-person contact between family members and attendance at important 
family events like weddings, funerals, religious holidays, graduations, and anniversaries, 
these policies undermine family unity and ultimately weaken family support systems.
although the current us immigration policy includes a relatively large list of relatives, it 
emphasizes legal definitions of family and assumes that formal, close kinship ties are the 
most instrumental. as a result, us immigrants are unable to reunite with certain relatives 
who may be extremely important for their family but fall outside of the defined set of 
eligible relatives. two of the most common situations in which this may occur are familial 
relationships that are not officially documented (e.g., the absence of a formal marriage or 
adoption) and a relationship category that is considered too distant by the law (e.g., cousin, 
grandparent, godmother). for example, cohabitation without official marriage is widespread 
in many countries of latin america and caribbean, as are informal (de facto) adoptions 
and multigenerational families. cohabiters and adoptive parents who did not formalize 
their relationship are unable to prove that relationship through official documentation to 
us immigration authorities. also, godparents, aunts, uncles, and grandparents often play 
instrumental roles in childrens upbringing, especially for families involved in international 
migration, but because these familial relationships do not qualify a migrant for a family-
based  visa,  there  is  no  mechanism  for  reuniting  with  them  in  the  current  immigration 
system. 
of course, the importance of extended family connections in particular cultures and family 
contexts present factual issues that are more difficult to prove when there is no formal 
marriage or birth certificate. in addition, concerns about possible fraud and even longer 
waits for visas if a wider range of relatives is allowed to immigrate are not unreasonable. 
however, other countries are taking steps in this direction. for example, australia allocates 
remaining relative, aged dependent relative, and orphan relative visas. this system 
prioritizes relatives contribution to or dependence on their family members in australia 
over the formality of the ties (dibp n.d.). 

unauthorized and mixed-status families
although family-based petitions are the primary mechanism by which people immigrate to 
the united states, a growing number of people have been completely barred from admission 

421

us immigration policy and the case for family unityand are ineligible to regularize their status. this has led to a significant rise in the number 
of mixed-status families. recent estimates suggest that 16.7 million people in the united 
states have at least one unauthorized member of their household (mathema 2017). among 
those most impacted are immediate relatives, both parents and spouses, of us citizens. in 
the past, most immigrants who lived and worked in the united states for lengthy periods 
of time became eligible for legalization through us citizen immediate family members; 
now many do not. today the average length of time an unauthorized person has lived in 
the united states is 13.7 years, and two-thirds of all unauthorized have been here for more 
than a decade, up from 35 percent in 1995 (krogstad, passel, and cohn 2016). of course, 
the longer someone lives in this country, the more likely that person is to form familial ties. 
one in three unauthorized persons  or 3.35 million people  are estimated to live with 
at least one us citizen child (migration policy institute 2017), while 5.1 million children 
in the united states live with at least one unauthorized parent (capps, fix, and zong 2016). 
most unauthorized immigrants today are long-term residents with significant family and 
community ties.
the lack of legal conformity within families has significant consequences often overlooked 
by us policymakers. us citizens married to unauthorized migrants are not able to enjoy 
many of the benefits of their citizenship, such as the freedom to travel. they endure lengthy 
separations from their spouses and, in some cases, may become immigrants themselves 
(lopez 2015). and us citizen children living in mixed-status families face a number of 
developmental  challenges  (suarez-orozco  et  al.  2011).  unauthorized  parents  typically 
have  lower  incomes,  poor  working  conditions,  and  higher  levels  of  poverty  (capps  et 
al. 2013). this can make it difficult for parents to provide financial stability for their us 
citizen  children.  other  research  shows  that  unauthorized  parents  have  lower  levels  of 
social support and less access to public and community resources to help with child care 
than parents with legal status (yoshikawa 2011). moreover, simultaneous with increases 
in the number of mixed-status families, the past decade has seen a significant increase in 
deportations and bars on reentry (lopez 2017). thus not only are unauthorized family 
members at risk of family separation through enforcement, but so too are their us citizen 
children and spouses. 

the detrimental effects of enforcement on families
the social costs of immigration enforcement is significant and should not be overlooked by 
policymakers. the deportation of a family member leads to significant family trauma for 
unauthorized and us citizens alike. families experience significant short-term and long-
term economic and emotional hardship following a parents detention or deportation (dreby 
2012;  warren  and  kerwin  2017).  they  also  experience  strains  in  family  relationships, 
especially between fathers and children as men are much more likely to be deported than 
are mothers (dreby 2015; golash-boza and hondageu-sotelo 2013). recent scholarship 
also  shows  significant  short-  and  long-term  mental  health  impacts  on  children  when 
parents are detained or deported. children have been shown exhibit significant behavioral 
effects, including changes in diet and sleep, frequent crying, anxiety, and fear during a 
deportation event. while some of these symptoms may decrease over time, studies show 
that withdrawal and angry or aggressive behavior persists (brabeck, lykes, and hunter 

422

journal on migration and human security2014). us citizen children also have been shown to experience higher levels of distress 
after a parents deportation regardless of whether they remain in the united states or return 
to mexico with their parents (zayas et al. 2015).
it is not only a deportation or detention that negatively impacts families: the threat of what de 
genova (2002) calls the fear of deportability alone has significant repercussions. young 
children in latino families in the united states have reported fears of separation even when 
their parents have never had any trouble with the law, fears that were even repeated by 
children whose parents were legal migrants to the united states (dreby 2012). one study 
shows heightened levels of distress among children with unauthorized parents even among 
those who have not had a parent deported (gulbas et al. 2015). another shows a decreased 
use of social programs such as medicaid and the special supplemental nutrition program 
for women, infants, and children (wic) due to the risk of deportation (vargas 2015). 
policies that focus on enforcement and the criminalization of unauthorized migration have 
undermined the well-being of us citizens, legal immigrants, and unauthorized migrants 
alike.

the benefits of family unity 
debate  over  preferred  us  immigration  policy    whether  it  should  focus  primarily  on 
skill-based or family-based immigration  is at least as old as the ina itself. will us 
society be better off if we admit immigrants based on their skills and education rather than 
on their family ties? arguments are usually made based on the cost-benefit analysis with 
respect to the potential impact of each type of migration on the economy and society. some 
policymakers also consider the breadth of services that exist for immigrants and the kind 
of new services they are willing to create (if any) for newcomers. often missing from the 
discussion is a large body of research that points to multiple benefits of family unity for 
the economic, social and psychological well-being of us citizens, like the children and 
spouses of the unauthorized discussed in the previous sections, as well as the immigrants 
to the united states (berkman et al. 2000; cohen and syme 1985). helping immigrants 
preserve and rebuild their families may indirectly improve the health and well-being of the 
entire us population.
a recent comprehensive report concluded that immigration has an overall positive impact 
on  the  us  economy,  suggesting  that  a  predominantly  family-based  migration  system 
carries net economic benefits (national academies of sciences, engineering, and medicine 
2016). this  and  other  research  emphasize  that  both  high-  and  low-  skilled  immigrants 
are crucial for sustained economic growth (bean et al. 2012). even though family-based 
immigrants have lower human capital upon arrival compared to skill- or employment-based 
immigrants, over time these differences narrow because family migrants are more likely to 
experience upward socioeconomic mobility as compared to employment-based migrants 
(duleep  and  regets  1996;  jasso  and  rosenzweig  1995).  highly  skilled  migrants  often 
experience downward mobility post-migration because their foreign degrees, credentials, 
and work experience are not directly transferable to the us job market (aydemir 2011; 
akresh 2006). a possible mismatch between specific classifications of new immigrants 
and  job  availability  prompted  countries  that  initially  favored  skill-based  immigration 

423

us immigration policy and the case for family unity(e.g., canada, australia) to settle on a system split between skill-based and employment-
based  admission.  unlike  the  united  states,  these  countries  also  provide  a  pathway  to 
permanent residency for temporary employment-based immigrants who spend some time 
in the country and have valid job offers. although guaranteed to have jobs after arrival, 
employment-based  immigrants  in  the  united  states  (e.g.,  h-1b  visa  holders)  may  be 
reluctant to change jobs or ask for raises or promotions for fear of losing their legal status, 
which is tied to their current employment. additionally, a pathway to permanent residency 
for most employment-based immigrants in the united states depends on their employers 
willingness and ability to sponsor their immigration, which may force them to trade higher 
wages for a green card.
one the other hand, while it may take longer for family migrants initially to find jobs, their 
legal status in the united states does not depend on their employers. this gives them more 
freedom to make the best use of their skills and experiences and also motivates them to 
invest in education, which improves their employment opportunities and income levels 
in the long term (akresh 2006; vallejo 2012). partly due to initial difficulties of finding 
employment in the mainstream economy, family-based immigrants are more likely to be 
self-employed and/or work in ethnic economies (light, bernard, and kim 1999; razin and 
light 1998). immigrant entrepreneurship plays an important role in their integration into 
us society, revitalizing ethnic communities and improving chances of upward mobility 
of  second-generation  immigrants  (national  academies  of  sciences,  engineering,  and 
medicine 2015; sanders and nee 1996; vallejo 2012). immigrants have higher business 
ownership and formation rates than nonimmigrants as roughly one out of 10 immigrant 
workers  owns  a  business  and  620  of  100,000  immigrants  start  a  business  each  month 
(fairlie  2012).  immigrant-owned  businesses  start  with  higher  levels  of  startup  capital 
than nonimmigrant-owned businesses with about two-thirds reporting personal and family 
savings as the main source of startup capital (fairlie 2012). data limitations often preclude 
comparison of entrepreneurship between employment- and family-based immigrants, but 
the fact that immigrants coming to the united states as children are more likely to start 
larger firms than immigrants arriving as adults (kerr and kerr 2016) suggests that the age 
at migration may play a more important role than the immigration pathway. 
assistance  from  family  members  in  the  united  states  is  not  limited  to  employment. 
family-sponsored immigrants are also likely to receive help from their us-based relatives 
with  housing,  healthcare  access,  transportation,  school  enrollment,  and  enrichment 
activities for children. the informal exchange of goods and services goes both ways as 
recent immigrants, especially older parents, often assume caregiver responsibilities and 
contribute to unpaid household labor (treas and gubernskaya 2015; treas and mazumdar 
2004). many employment-based immigrants lack this kind of support, which is crucial for 
alleviating initial stress related to immigration. moreover, there are virtually no federal or 
state assistance programs for newly arrived immigrants (except for refugees), and there 
is no indication that the current administration will institute such a program. in fact, all 
lprs with less than five years of residence in the united states are explicitly prohibited 
from receiving federal means-tested public benefits. while other countries that prioritize 
skill-based immigration have a more comprehensive welfare state system of benefits and 
more robust immigrant integration policies (bloemraad 2006), family support is the only 
kind of support the foreign-born in the united states can access and is vital to the health 

424

journal on migration and human securityand well-being of families. policymakers promoting a skill-based immigration system and 
using other countries as examples need to take into account other programs, benefits, and 
services that are available to immigrants in those countries but not in the united states. for 
example, canada has a publicly funded healthcare system that provides health insurance 
not only to citizens but also to permanent residents. canada also allocates federal funds 
for immigrant integration services, such as free language classes and community and labor 
market integration services (bloemraad 2006). these programs are likely to be as important 
for immigrant integration as their human capital.

policy recommendations
given the benefits of family unity in the us immigrant context and the significant negative 
consequences that family separation  both during family sponsored immigration and due 
to immigration enforcement events  the united states would do well to make a number 
of changes to current policy and practice so as to reaffirm the commitment to family unity. 
first, prolonged separation of lprs from their immediate family members should end. 
even a year in the life of a child spent forcefully separated from her parents can have 
long-term negative implications for her health and well-being, which may persist despite 
eventual family reunification. 
second, family members who are stuck in the long process of obtaining or adjusting to 
lpr status should be able to travel. either establishing a temporary visa for this category 
of prospective immigrants or allowing prospective migrants to apply for visitors visas 
will  facilitate  family  unity  and  speed  up  subsequent  immigrant  integration.  risks  that 
prospective immigrants will overstay their visas may be minimized by making it clear that 
violating temporary visa status requirements will preclude them from obtaining permanent 
status in the future. 
third,  given  the  expanding  evidence  on  the  mental  health  and  economic  impacts  of 
enforcement on families, the definition of hardship in granting waivers to deportation needs 
to be revised. fathers and mothers of us citizen children should be afforded a path to legal 
status because deportation not only threatens childrens well-being, but also potentially 
increases the burden on state-run welfare and foster care systems. members of mixed-
status families should be provided a pathway to legalization. a step in this direction would 
be to expand eligibility for in-country adjustment of status.3
finally,  it  is  important  to  note  that  preserving  family  unity  does  not  necessarily  mean 
increasing  the  number  of  permanent  immigrants,  and  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  assume 
that all families want to be reunited in the united states. temporary family separation is 
almost inevitable, especially in the beginning of highly uncertain immigration process. 
additionally, many families today choose global arrangements in which members reside, 
at least periodically if not more permanently, in different countries (coe 2014; stephens 
2007). such transnational families take advantage of new technologies and the availability 
of temporary visas to maintain family unity despite the distance (parreas 2001; wilding 
2006). making travelling to the united states difficult through expensive and uncertain 
visitor visa application processes, excessive vetting, and unwarranted scrutiny at the border 
3   ina  245(i), 8 u.s.c. 1255(i). 

425

us immigration policy and the case for family unitymay prompt some family members to apply for permanent residency or to stay without 
proper documentation even if they had no previous plans to do so. allowing for greater 
flexibility for migrant families may paradoxically decrease permanent settlement in the 
united states.

conclusion
positive socioeconomic outcomes of family immigrants and their children and evidence 
of  economic,  social,  and  psychological  benefits  of  family  support  suggest  that  family 
unity should remain a priority in us immigration policy. families are a buffer that aids 
immigrant  integration,  provides  a  social  and  economic  safety  net  for  new americans, 
helps to incorporate, and builds new businesses in the united states. and yet despite these 
benefits, the principle of family unity has faced significant hurdles over the past decade, 
including many unintended consequences for families such as lengthy visa backlogs and 
processing delays, visa restrictions, biased assumptions about family structure, bans on 
reentry, and separations due to enforcement practices. such policies increase the likelihood 
of lengthy family separations and ultimately undermine families. 
going  forward,  the  new  administration  should  seek  out  ways  to  enhance  family  unity, 
rather than undermine it. enforcement policies should deprioritize deportation of those 
with  significant  family  ties  to  us  citizens.  the  definition  of  family  members  eligible 
for  immigration  should  match  family  members  lived  experiences.  and  wait  times  in 
immigration  applications  must  be  reduced. after  all,  strong  immigrant  families  create 
strong american communities. 
