the impact of externalization of 
migration controls on the rights 
of asylum seekers and other 
migrants1

bill frelick 
human rights watch

ian m. kysel 
american civil liberties union (aclu) of southern california

jennifer podkul 
kids in need of defense

executive summary
wars, conflict, and persecution have forced more people to flee their homes 
and seek refuge and safety elsewhere than at any time since the end of 
world war ii. as displaced people and other migrants increasingly move 
out of the conflict-ridden and less developed regions of their displacement 
and  into  relatively  rich  and  stable  regions  of  the  world,  the  countries 
of  destination  are  increasingly  working  to  contain  and  even  stem  the 
migration flow before it reaches their shores. perversely, countries that 
have  developed  generally  rights-sensitive  standards  and  procedures  for 
assessing  protection  claims  of  asylum  seekers  within  their  jurisdictions 
have simultaneously established barriers that prevent migrants, including 
asylum seekers, from setting foot on their territories or otherwise triggering 
protection  obligations.  consequently,  those  who  would  otherwise  have 
been able to avail themselves of asylum procedures, social support, and 
decent reception conditions are often relegated to countries of first arrival 

1billfrelickistherefugeerightsprogramdirectorathumanrightswatch;ianm.kyselisastaffattorney
at the american civil liberties union of southern california and also co-chairs the steering committee of 
the international migrants bill of rights (imbr) initiative; and jennifer podkul is the director of policy at 
kids in need of defense. the views presented here along with any errors or omissions are the authors alone. 
the authors would like to thank the georgetown law human rights institute for organizing discussion of 
these issues at the 2015 samuel dash conference on human rights and, along with its co-organizers, for 
convening further discussion in geneva, switzerland in 2015, as well as the participants in these convenings; 
becca bailis and julie kornfeld for their research assistance; human rights watch reviewers of the paper, 
benjamin ward, james ross, elaine pearson, alison parker, and daniel wilkinson; and the student attorneys 
of the federal legislation and administrative clinic at georgetown for their important contributions. finally, 
the authors would like to thank the participants in the center for migration studies rethinking the global 
refugee protection system conference in july 2016 and the editors and reviewers at the journal on migration 
and human security for their insightful comments and suggestions on drafts of this manuscript. 

 2016 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 4 number 4 (2016): 190-220or  transit  that  have  comparatively  less  capacity  to  ensure  protection  of 
human rights in accordance with international standards. 
this paper seeks to develop a working definition of the externalization of 
migration controls and how such externalization of the border implicates 
the human rights of migrants, and asylum seekers in particular. although 
the majority of those migrants seeking legal protections stay in countries 
neighboring  their  own,  hundreds  of  thousands  continue  their  journeys 
in search of protection and stability in more distant states, including in 
the  european  union,  the  united  states,  and  australia.  in  response  to 
the  significant  increase  in  asylum  seekers  arriving  at  their  borders,  all 
three  entities  have  significantly  increased  deterrence  measures  with 
the  hopes  of  keeping  new  arrivals  from  entering.  this  paper  will  thus 
highlight a number of the most troubling externalization strategies used 
by the european union, the united states, and australia. finally, because 
rights-threatening  externalization  law,  policies,  and  practices  implicate 
the  international  legal  responsibility  of  the  destination  states  pursuing 
them, the paper will conclude by presenting recommendations that could 
strengthen  protection  of  human  rights  in  the  context  of  state  actions 
seeking to manage migration.

i. introduction
as displaced people and other migrants2increasinglymoveoutoftheconflict-riddenand
less-developed regions of their displacement and into relatively rich and stable regions 
of the world, the countries of destination are increasingly working to contain and even 
stemthemigrationflowbeforethetideofthosemigratingreachestheirshores.oneof
the cruel ironies in recent years is that a number of countries that have developed rights-
sensitive  standards  and  procedures  for  assessing  protection  claims  of  asylum  seekers 
within  their  jurisdictions  have  simultaneously  established  barriers  that  prevent  asylum 
seekers from setting foot on their territories or otherwise triggering protection obligations. 
consequently, asylum seekers who would otherwise have been able to avail themselves of 
asylum procedures, social support, and decent reception conditions are often consigned to 
countriesoffirstarrivalortransitthathavecomparativelylesscapacitytoensurerightsand
process claims in accordance with international standards. 
humans migrate for a host of reasons  to escape harm or death, to reunify with family 
members, or to search for new opportunities  and these factors can evolve en route. 

2   in this essay, the term migrant is used broadly to include any person who is outside of their country of 
citizenship or, in the case of stateless migrants, their country of habitual residence. this term encompasses 
thosewhoaredisplacedbyconflict,naturaldisasterorothercauses,andalsoincludesthosewhoqualify
underrelevantinternational,regional,ornationaldefinitionsofrefugee.inlieuofrefugee,thetermasylum
seeker  is  used  throughout  to  broadly  describe  those  migrants  who  are  seeking  and  merit  humanitarian 
protections, whether under international, regional, or national law protecting refugees or other forms of legal 
protections based on risk, vulnerability, or legal status (and also to emphasize, as does refugee law generally, 
that migrants who are deserving of those protections as a matter of law have a right to them whether or not 
they have yet been formally recognized or declared to be a refugee). 

191

the impact of externalization of migration controlsrecent estimates place the total number of migrants worldwide at an all-time high and 
rising  with the latest estimates above 244 million (unfpa 2002). the number of the 
forcibly displaced  refugees, asylum seekers, and internally displaced persons  are 
also  at  historical  highs. the  overwhelming  majority  of  the  approximately  63.5  million 
people of concern to the united nations high commissioner for refugees (unhcr) at 
the close of 2015 have remained close to their places of original displacement (more than 
38 million of them remain internally displaced in their home countries; 86 percent of the 
worlds refugees, 13.9 million, are staying in the developing world) (unhcr 2016c). but 
hundredsofthousandshavemovedorareseekingtomovebeyondnearbycountriesoffirst
arrival and knocking on the doors  and sometimes pushing them open or climbing over 
and around them  of industrialized countries, principally member states of the european 
union and the united states, as well as australia, though its deterrent measures have very 
effectivelykeptnewarrivalsfromenteringinrecentyears.3 
the worlds attention has recently been seized by the drama of asylum seekers and migrants 
on overcrowded boats and at newly-erected fences on the frontiers that divide the worlds 
haves from the have-nots. from london to canberra, political leaders have suggested 
that people smugglers were responsible for enticing migrants to make their journey or, 
worse,thathumantraffickerswereforcingortrickingthemtoboardboatsortakedangerous
overland routes (frelick 2015).4 politicians argued that the tide could be stemmed by 
crackingdownonsmugglingandtraffickingcrimesyndicatesandincreasingdeterrenceto
dissuade people from migrating. some gave voice to the worst fears  that terrorists might 
poseasrefugees.otherssuggestedthatmanyofthoseatthegateswereseekingjobsrather
than asylum and were not in need or deserving of any rights protections at all. finally, 
particularlyineurope,manysaidthatevenrefugeesfleeingconflictandpersecutioncould
and should have found asylum in countries closer to home, and were moving onward not 
to seek protection but rather only in search of a better quality of life.
this essay acknowledges that the united states and most of the eu member states have 
generally been providing protection to the people on their territories with legitimate claims 
for  international  protection    once  migrants  gain  access  to  territory  and  to  asylum  or 
status determination procedures. a worrisome parallel development, however, has been 
the development by those states of a toolbox for preventing migrants, including asylum 
seekers, from reaching their territories and triggering the states international obligations. 
another, distinct problem is that migrants are removed from a states territory quickly to 
prevent access to asylum or status determination procedures.5 

3   see the discussion of australia in section iv(b), below.
4smugglingofmigrantsisgenerallydefinedastheprocurement,inordertoobtain,directlyorindirectly,
afinancialorothermaterialbenefit,oftheillegalentryofapersonintoastatepartyofwhichthepersonisnot
anationalorapermanentresident;and,[t]raffickinginpersonsisgenerallydefinedastherecruitment,
transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt of persons, by means of the threat or use of force or other forms 
of coercion, of abduction, of fraud, of deception, of the abuse of power or of a position of vulnerability or of 
thegivingorreceivingofpaymentsorbenefitstoachievetheconsentofapersonhavingcontroloveranother
person,forthepurposeofexploitation(unodc2004).
5considerationofeffortsbystatestoexpeditiouslyremoveorotherwisepreventaccesstoasylumorstatus
determination procedures for migrants within a states territory is outside the scope of this article.

192

journal on migration and human securitysectioniiofthisarticlewillsuggestaworkingdefinitionofexternalizationofmigration
controls and describe some of the ways that this phenomenon works in practice. section iii 
willbrieflydiscussthehumanrightsofmigrants,andasylumseekersinparticular,andhow
theexternalizationofmigrantcontrolsaffectstheserightsinpractice,includingthespecific
issue of the international responsibility of destination states that pursue migration-control 
externalization. section iv will highlight a number of the most troubling externalization 
strategies used by australia, the european union, and the united states. section v will 
present some recommendations that could strengthen protection of human rights in the 
contextofexternalizationofmigrationcontrolsorothereffortstomanagemigration.

ii. what is the externalization of migration controls?
externalization  of  migration  controls  describes  extraterritorial  state  actions  to  prevent 
migrants, including asylum seekers, from entering the legal jurisdictions or territories of 
destination countries or regions or making them legally inadmissible without individually 
considering the merits of their protection claims. these actions include unilateral, bilateral, 
and multilateral state engagement (see gammeltoft-hansen 2011; see also crpeau 2013), 
as  well  as  the  enlistment  of  private  actors.  these  can  include  direct  interdiction  and 
preventive policies,6 as well as more indirect actions, such as the provision of support for 
or assistance to security or migration management practices in and by third countries.7 
as migration policy has become an increasingly politicized issue, externalization is often 
deceptively framed as either or both a security imperative and a life-saving humanitarian 
endeavor rather than simply as a strategy of migration containment and control.8 control 
ofmigrationflowsiscastasanefforttopreventillegal (or irregular) immigration or 
to protect migrants from the dangers of the journey.9 10 extraterritorial actions to manage 

6   some of the most direct mechanisms have been referred to as  non-entre policies, particularly in the 
refugee and asylum context (see gammeltoft-hansen 2011; hathaway 2005).
7   in the context of migration and border externalization, it can be helpful to consider the distinctions between 
a migrants country of origin (the country or state from which a migrant departs though not always the state 
of which the migrant is a national or citizen), destination states (the migrants intended destination state) and 
third countries or countries of transit (those states through which a migrant will or intends to transit en route). 
8   as politicization of migration has occurred, it has become more common to refer to migration policies 
as  forms  of  migration  control,  which  presumes  an  inherent  security  risk  stemming  from  migration. 
contemporary migration controls frequently also criminalize migration, which reinforces states goals of 
preventing illegal immigration by emphasizing these presumed security concerns (crpeau 2013; see also 
spijkerboer 2013). 
9thetermillegalimmigrantissometimesusedbygovernmentofficialsorothersinanefforttodistinguish
between economic migrants and migrants seeking asylum or those with refugee status, therefore implying that 
economicmigrantsareallillegal.however,migrationflowsaregenerallymixed,andmigrantsthemselves
travel with mixed motives, making such simple characterizations generally inaccurate and unhelpful (see 
mattila  2000).  the  un  system  uses  the  term  irregular  migrant  to  underscore  that  migrants  have  rights 
regardlessoftheirlegalstatus(g.a.res.3449[xxx],u.n.gaor,30thsess.,u.n.doc.a/res/3449
[dec. 9, 1975]). 
10   migrants rights are implicated in key human rights laws and treaties, including: the universal declaration 
of  human  rights  (10  dec.  1948),  u.n.g.a.  res.  217 a  (iii)  (1948),  pmbl.    1  (hereinafter,  udhr); 
international covenant on civil and political rights (new york, 16 dec. 1966) 999 u.n.t.s. 171 and 1057 
u.n.t.s.  407,  entered  into  force  23  mar.  1976  [the  provisions  of  article  41  (human  rights  committee) 
entered into force 28 mar. 1979], pmbl.  2, (hereinafter, iccpr); international covenant on economic, 

193

the impact of externalization of migration controlsmigration flows are also increasingly linked to the ineffectiveness (and politicization)
ofnationalorregionalmigrationpolicies.overtime,thephenomenonhasexpandedto
commonly  include  the  systematic  enlistment  of  third  countries  in  preventing  migrants, 
including asylum seekers, from entering destination states. third countries enlisted in the 
prevention of onward movement of migrants and asylum seekers are  at least implicitly 
 encouraged to prevent migrants and asylum seekers from entering their territories or 
to  apprehend  and  return  them  (haddad  2008,  199).11  much  of  this  public  engagement 
takesplaceinthecontextoftransnationalcrime-controleffortsbystatesthatisdirected
atseekingtocounterhumantraffickingorpeoplesmuggling(andoftenconflatesthetwo)
(plaut  2015). a  prominent  example  is  law  enforcement  or  military  assistance  designed 
to stop the flow of illicit materials, such as weapons and drugs, which may have the
additional effect of sealing borders (both for exit and entry), encouraging push-backs,
increasingapprehensions,and/orreducingaccesstoprotectionmechanismsinthecontext
of apprehension and deportation practices.12 
externalization occurs through formalized migration policies and visa regimes, through 
bilateral  and  multilateral  policy  initiatives  between  states,  as  well  as  through  ad  hoc 
policies and practices. externalization policies and practices may explicitly seek to prevent 
the entry of migrants into a destination state or have only an indirect impact on migration. 
the rhetoric that provides the humanitarian rationale for externalization focuses not only 
on preventing migrants and asylum seekers from embarking on what is characterized as 
a dangerous journey, but is also framed as an exercise in capacity building for countries 
oforigin,countriesoffirstarrival,andtransitcountries(ifrc2015).whileitmaybe
questionable whether such capacity-building actions seek to improve rights protections in 
countries of origin as a humanitarian end in itself, or rather to address the root causes 
ofinternationalmigrationasameansofcontainingirregularmigrationflows,thebuilding
social and cultural rights (new york, 16 dec. 1966) 993 u.n.t.s. 3, entered into force 3 jan. 1976., pmbl.  
2 (hereinafter, icesr); international convention on the elimination of all forms of racial discrimination 
(new york, 7 mar. 1966) 660 u.n.t.s. 195, 5 i.l.m. 352 (1966), entered into force 4 jan. 1969, pmbl.  
2(hereinafter,icerd);conventionagainsttortureandothercruel,inhumanordegradingtreatment
orpunishment(newyork,10dec.1984)1465u.n.t.s.85,23i.l.m.1027(1984),asmodifiedby24
i.l.m.  535  (1985),  entered  into  force  26  june  1987,  pmbl.    2  (hereinafter  cat);  convention  on  the 
rights of the child (new york, 20 nov. 1989) 1577 u.n.t.s. 3, 28 i.l.m. 1448 (1989), entered into force 2 
sept. 1990, pmbl.  1 (hereinafter, crc); convention relating to the status of refugees (geneva, 28 july 
1951) 189 u.n.t.s. 137, entered into force 22 april 1954, art. 1a (hereinafter 1951 refugee convention); 
international convention of the protection of the rights of all migrant workers and of their families  (new 
york, 18 dec. 1990)  2220 u.n.t.s. 3, entered into force 1 july 2003 (hereinafter icrmw); amongst 
others, including regional human rights declarations and treaties.
11   haddad contends that border externalization encourages apprehension and return, rather than resettlement, 
as it assumes that most migrants can be deported (see also crpeau 2013  59, highlighting a trend in european 
migration policy as more focused on stopping irregular migrants than protecting migrants rights).
12   for example, the united states has recently given $112 million in technological assistance to mexico 
for border security. this support is being allocated to three security lines north of mexicos border with 
guatemalaandbelize.thestatedgoalistocounterhumantraffickinganddrugrunningfromtheregion.
underthemridainitiative,pillariii,theusdepartmentofstate(dos)focusessupportonmexicosefforts
toestablishasecuresouthernborder,withthestatedgoalofpermittingfreeflowoflicitgoodsandpeople
whiledeterringillicitflows.forfy2016,dosrequested$39millionformexicoundermridatoaddress
securitythreatsfromdrugtraffickingandviolentcrime.additionalfundingcomesfromtheusdepartment
ofdefense(dod)counter-drugbudget(seedos2012;seealsoisaacson,meyer,andmorales2014).

194

journal on migration and human securityofcapacityfordevelopingruleoflaw,respectforhumanrights,conflictresolution,good
governance, and humane quality of life all represent positive aspects of externalization 
(seeogata1995;seealsohaddad2005,202-02,204).whilerecognizingthatsuccessfully
addressing root causes should enable more people to choose to remain in their homes or in 
countriesoffirstarrival,capacity-buildingpoliciesandpracticescanhavetheadditional
effect, even if only indirectly, of advancing, strengthening, or rationalizing migration-
control externalization.
externalization  policies  are  often  also  pursued  with  the  stated  goal  of  assisting  third 
countries  with  migration  control  and  management.  examples  of  these  schemes  include 
policies and practices that encourage both third countries and countries of origin to prevent 
would-be migrants from migrating through incentives for individuals to remain in place 
and also through physical or legal barriers (plaut 2015); policies and practices encouraging 
migrant apprehensions (interdictions, interceptions, or turn-backs  including on the 
highseas)throughlogistical,financial,orpoliticalsupport,ordirectlyinexchangefor
aid; the development of readmission and incentive structures between third countries and 
countries of origin (hyndman and mountz 2008, 253);13financialandpoliticalsupport
ofmigrantdetentionorinterdictionpracticesbythirdcountriesoroff-shore(ibid.);and
partnerships to combat illegal (or irregular) migration or to build capacity of immigration 
or  asylum  systems  in  third  countries  (haddad  2008,  196).  externalization  policies  can 
also include measures implemented entirely through requirements imposed on the private 
sector,suchascarriersanctionsimposedontransportationfirms,andthathavetheeffect
of preventing departure or transit of migrants to destination states. in the context of forced 
migration, externalization efforts may also extend to efforts aimed at diverting asylum
seekers to third countries, such as to third-country processing centers or protected areas 
near countries of origin (andrijasevic 2010, 266).
in conjunction with and often to justify the externalization of migration controls, states 
have specifically sought to reduce access to asylum. many states have pursued a two-
prongedstrategytoreduceaccesstoasylum.onewayistopush,prod,andsometimes
payacountryoffirstarrivaloratransitstatetoseektocurbthemigrationflowthrough
itsownenforcementmeasures.thesecondlineistodeemthetransitorfirstarrivalstatea
safethirdcountryorfirstcountryofasylumthathasorcouldhaveprovidedprotection
to a refugee, and to which the person can be returned after only a cursory admissibility 
determination. 
unhcrsexecutivecommitteefirsttackledthequestionofwhichcountryisresponsible
for examining an asylum request in 1979. at that time, the executive committee issued 
a formal conclusion holding that (1) the intentions of the asylum-seeker as regards the 
country  in  which  he  wishes  to  request  asylum  should  as  far  as  possible  be  taken  into 
account and (2) asylum should not be refused solely on the ground that it could be sought 
from another state (unhcr executive committee 1979). but the same conclusion also 
said that if a person before requesting asylum, already has a connection or close links with 
anotherstate,hemayifitappearsfairandreasonablebecalleduponfirsttorequestasylum

13   examples of european border externalization include an 8.5 billion euro program through which the 
european union signs agreements with countries that agree to readmission of nationals who are illegally 
present on the territory of a member state (hyndman and mountz 2008, 266).

195

the impact of externalization of migration controlsfrom that state (ibid.). the dublin regulation in europe14 (frelick 2015) and the us-
canada safe third country agreement15 (frelick 1996) and state practice have expanded 
the scope of this conclusion in the development of the principle of safe third country as a 
basis for determining the country within a set of countries with harmonized standards that 
would be responsible for examining an asylum claim, which included a basis for ruling 
inadmissible  asylum  claims  in  countries  of  destination  (unhcr  executive  committee 
1999). 
with the safe third country concept established in international law, what is at issue in 
the context of externalization of border control is not the principle per se, but whether 
thecountryoffirstarrivalortransitis,infact,safe.thisrequiresafactualassessmentof
whetheritprovideseffectiveprotection,whichisbasedonthefollowingcriteria:

  no risk of persecution within the meaning of the 1951 convention or serious harm 

in the previous state; 

  no risk of onward refoulement from the previous state;
 

compliance, in law and practice, of the previous state with relevant international 
refugee and human rights standards, including adequate standards of living, work 
rights, health care, and education; 
access to a right of legal stay; 
assistanceofpersonswithspecificneeds;and
timely access to a durable solution (unhcr 2002).

 
 
 

in the rush to render asylum claims inadmissible on the basis of the safe third country 
concept,nominaladherencetothesecriteriahasoftenbeendeemedsufficientevenwhen
there are evident gaps between formal acceptance of principles and their realization in 
practice. in effect, asserting that a person should be denied asylum because he or she
couldhavesoughtanineffectiveformofprotectioninacountryoffirstarrivalortransit
operationalizes the externalization of migration control  and provides perhaps the starkest 
illustration of the serious threat that externalization poses to the protection of the rights of 
migrants, and of asylum seekers in particular. 

iii. the impact of border externalization on the right of 
migrants
borderexternalizationpoliciesandpracticescandirectlyaffectthehumanrightsofmigrants
andtheinternationalobligationsofstatestoprotecttheminsignificantways.
first, and perhaps most importantly, by directing migrant flows to third countries,
externalization influences the nature and duration of state legal obligations, as well
as which states are charged under international law with the protection of the rights of 

14europeancouncilregulationno343/2003of18february2003establishingthecriteriaandmechanisms
for determining the member state responsible for examining an asylum application lodged in one of the 
member states by a third-country national (dublin regulation).
15    united  states  and  canada  safe  third  country  agreement:  hearing  before  the  subcommittee  on 
immigration, border  security,  and  claims  of  the  committee of  the  judiciary,  house  of  representatives, 
117thcong.(2002),october16.

196

journal on migration and human securitymigrants.forexample,borderexternalizationmayattemptto(oreffectively)limitformal
legal obligations, including the right to seek and enjoy asylum, by preventing migrants 
from ever coming under the jurisdiction of destination states.16 
suchexternalizationpoliciesandpracticescanthenplacesignificantandunequalburdens
on third countries; often states with fewer resources are forced (in practice and by law) to 
seek to ensure the protection of migrants rights, including rights in the context of asylum.17 
when the rights of asylum seekers and migrants are violated in such third countries as 
aresultofadestinationstatesexternalizationefforts,thiscanraisecomplicatedissues
of state responsibility for both destination states and third countries. simply put, it is a 
violation of international law for states to directly support the internationally wrongful acts 
of another state. states may not knowingly aid or assist another state in the commission 
of an internationally wrongful act if the underlying act would be internationally wrongful 
if committed by the former state (ilc 2001). as a result, destination states pursuing border 
externalization strategies may come to be responsible (as a matter of international law) for 
rights violations outside of their own territory, as at a minimum they are responsible when 
they exert control over the acts of third countries.18 
second, externalization may actually trigger, directly or indirectly, one or more categories 
of  rights  violations.  regardless  of  their  status  or  location,  migrants  have  a  range  of 
fundamental rights that can be implicated by migration-control externalization practices 
and which protect migrants against abuse throughout the migration process.19 these include 
rights that are implicated during transit, including while on the high seas and over land, if 
and when detained as well as during the expulsion or deportation process.20 
inadditiontothiscoresetofrights,somemigrantsmaybecoveredbyspecificbodiesof
law that provide a higher standard of protection than is available to other migrants. for 
example, child migrants are recognized to have a special status under international law, as 
arethosefleeingrightsabusesintheircountriesofcitizenshiporhabitualresidence,such
as refugees and asylum seekers or stateless people.21 at times, migrants also encounter 

16   the right to seek and enjoy asylum is enshrined in the universal declaration of human rights and 
isaffirmedbothbyrefugeelawandgeneralhumanrightslaw(udhr,supra, art. 14). there are at least 
somecircumstancesinwhichstatepracticesuggestsadeliberateefforttolimitrightsprotectionsavailableto
migrantsthroughthewayinwhichborderexternalizationeffortsarepursued.forexample,statesmaydirect
migrationtothirdcountrieswhicharenotpartiestothe1951refugeeconvention,andthusmigrantsbenefit
from fewer formal legal protections, particularly regarding refoulement (hyndman and mountz 2008, 266).
17   this can result in unfair burden sharingwithonlylimitedpoliticalorfinancialsupport(seeatger2013,7).
18   the increasing recognition of the extra-territorial responsibility of states to fulfill their human rights
obligations, such as in hirsi jamaa and others v. italy, suggest that international law is likely to more broadly 
recognize  breaches  of  international  law  and  standards  in  the  context  of  the  externalization  of  migration 
controls.seehirsijamaaandothersv.italy,no.27765/09(ecthr,february23,2012).
19   the rights of all international migrants are derived from many bodies of law, including general human 
rightslaw;humanrightslawprotectingspecificcategoriesofpeople(e.g.,children)andwhichthusprotect
specificcategoriesofmigrants;internationallaborlaw;internationalhumanitarianlaw;andinternational
refugee law, among others. for a restatement of rights and commentaries that source their origins to various 
international treaties and the regional conventions, see imbr (2014). 
20   see, e.g., udhr, supra; iccpr, supra; and icesr, supra.
21   see the 1951 refugee convention, supra; and crc, supra.

197

the impact of externalization of migration controlssituations  during  transit  that  increase  their  vulnerability  or  trigger  the  attachment  of 
additionalrights,suchastherightsofvictimsoftraffickingorothercrimes.22 
the perilous journey undertaken by many migrants, including on the high seas, as well 
asclandestineeffortsbysometocrossincreasinglymilitarized(andsometimesclosed)
borders, can expose them to violations of the right to life and the right to seek and enjoy 
asylum and can additionally implicate their rights as victims of crime and abuse (such 
asbytraffickers)(seeunohchr2014,1-2).externalizationcanalsoincreasedemand
for both third-country resources for and interest in apprehension of migrants, and this, in 
turn, can increase the likelihood of apprehension and both the likelihood and the duration 
of detention. yet, throughout this entire process, migrants maintain fundamental rights, 
including to liberty and security of person (including a presumption against detention on 
the basis of migration status) and, if deprived of liberty and otherwise, rights against torture 
and ill-treatment.23 
in  addition  to  being  associated  with  increased  enforcement  practices  (and  detention  of 
migrants), externalization can implicate asylum rights and prohibitions against refoulement. 
all persons have the right to leave any country, including their own; refugees and asylum 
seekers also have rights to seek and enjoy asylum and not to be punished for illegally 
entering a country to do so.24 perhaps the most important obligation, that of non-refoulement, 
prohibits states from returning a refugee to territories where her or his life or freedom would 
be threatened on account of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social 
group, or political opinion. the principle of non-refoulement also prohibits states from 
returning anyone to a state in which they would be exposed to the danger of torture or cruel, 
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.25  26 in some regions and circumstances, 
those  fearing  mistreatment  are  also  protected under  human  rights  law  from  return  to  a 
broader set of harms, including generalized violence or serious deprivation of a range of 
human rights (see, e.g., unhcr 1984, part iii[3]).27 these obligations require that states 
provide migrants access to screening and examination of any refugee or asylum claims, 
includinginsituationsofmixedmigratoryflows(wherenotallmigrantsmayultimatelybe
determined to merit or require international protection) (see unhcr 2016b).28 

22 migrants may also not fall into any specific category of vulnerable group recognized by existing
international law, but there is growing recognition of various categories of survival migrants, or those 
who are forced to leave their countries of origin as a result of impacts of climate change, environmental 
degradation, natural disaster or serious economic and social distress (see betts 2010, 11; see also imbr 2014 
[recognizing, in article 4, the rights of vulnerable migrants]).
23   see, e.g., iccrr, supra art. 7, 9; cat, supra.
24   see udhr, supra art. 13; the 1951 refugee convention, supra  art. 31(1).
25   1951 refugee convention, supra art. 33; iccpr, supra art. 7; cat, supra art. 3; unhrc 1992.
26thecontentofthisrighthasbeenspecificallytiedtoarticle7oftheiccprbytheuncommitteecreated
by the treaty. also note that the cat does not have a nexus requirement; thus, the cat applies to all migrants, 
even those who do not fear persecution on a ground recognized by refugee law (cat, supra art. 1).
27   some migrants who leave their country for reasons that fall outside of refugee protection can still become 
refugees while abroad if circumstances in their country of origin change to create a well-founded fear of 
persecution (unhcr 2007a, 5). 
28   the right to seek and enjoy asylum and the refugee protection regime also provides the right to due 
process in the context of status determinations (a right which is also independently guaranteed under human 
rights law) and prohibits the use of detention as a deterrent to potential asylum seekers. 

198

journal on migration and human securityenforcementpressuresonthirdcountriescanincreasethedifficultyofcrossingborders
for asylum seekers and refugees as well as the ability to seek or access procedures for 
determining  refugee  status.  given  that  states  are  forbidden  to  practice  indirect  or 
chain refoulement  in which refugees are returned to a third territory where they face 
persecution, harm, or the serious threat of being returned to their home country or another 
territory to face persecution or torture  migration-control externalization can implicate 
the very cornerstone of the human rights regime.29 

iv. regional case studies
the united states, australia, and the european union are the primary destination states 
or regions that have engaged in deliberate externalization strategies aimed at preventing 
migrants and asylum seekers from irregularly reaching their shores. 

a. the united states

useffortstoexternalizemigrationcontrolsgobackatleasttothereaganadministration.30 
the 1981 interdiction agreement between the united states and haiti authorized the us 
coast guard to interdict haitian vessels on the high seas, detain the passengers, and return 
them to haiti.31 despite assurances in president reagans executive order that the united 
states would respect the principle of non-refoulement,usofficialsbroughtfewerthanone
dozen of the 22,651 haitians interdicted at sea between 1981 and 1990 to the united states 
to pursue asylum claims during the highly repressive duvalier dictatorships (taft-morales 
and sullivan 1993, 9). 
aseptember30,1990coupthatoverthrewhaitisfirstdemocraticallyelectedpresident,
jean-bertrand aristide, caused the number of haitians taking to boats to spike. us president 
george h.w. bush attempted to continue the reagan policy of shipboard screening, but 
ran into legal challenges alleging that the screening was inadequate.32onmay23,1992,
he issued the kennebunkport order, which threw out reagans nod to the principle of
non-refoulement, and authorized summary returns of interdicted haitians with no refugee 
screening  whatsoever.33  in  sale  v.  haitian  centers  council,  the  us  supreme  court 
countenancedthekennebunkportorderpolicyofsummaryreturnofrefugeesinterdicted
on the high seas.34 several international bodies have rejected the notion that the law of 
non-refoulement does not apply on the high seas (or extraterritorially).35 the un high 

29   states non-refoulement obligations apply to their actions within and beyond their own territory (see 
unhcr 2007b; von sternberg 2014).
30executiveorderno.12,324,46fed.reg.48,109,(1981),reprintedin8u.s.c.1182(supp.v.1981).
31   interdiction agreement between the united states of america and haiti, sept. 23, 1981, u.s.-haiti, 33 
u.s.t. 3559, 3559-60
32   haitian refugee center v. baker, 789 f. supp. 1552 (s.d. fla. 1991), revd, 949 f.2d 1109 (11th cir. 
1991), cert. denied, 112 s. ct. 1245 (1992).
33executiveorderno.12,807,57fed.reg.23,133(1992).
34   sale v. hatian centers council, 807 f. supp. 928 (e.d.n.y. 1992), cert. granted, 113 s. ct. 52 (1992).
35    see  generally,  inter-american  commission  on  human  rights,  report  no.  51/96,  decision  of  the 
commissionastothemeritsofcase10,675(march13,1997);hirsijamaaandothersv.italy,no.27765/09
(ecthr, february 23, 2012). cf. r(europeanromarightscenter)v.immigrationofficeatpragueairport,
[2004] ukhl 55.

199

the impact of externalization of migration controlscommissioner  for  refugees  called  the  sale  ruling  a  setback  to  modern  international 
refugee law (unhcr 1993). 
as widespread human rights violations continued in haiti and haitians continued to seek 
protectionintheunitedstates,theclintonadministrationbrieflytriedshipboardscreening,
but decided in july 1994 to detain interdicted haitians temporarily at the us naval base 
in guantnamo, cuba rather than summarily return them to haiti (wasem 2011, 5). they 
were not screened for refugee status but held pending their return to haiti (ibid., 4). it was 
clearly conveyed to the haitians at guantanamo that they would never be resettled in the 
united states (gordon 1994). 
president clinton extended this externalization of migration control to cuban boat and raft 
migrants as well. after a decades-long us policy of welcoming all rescued or irregularly-
arriving cubans to the united states and automatically granting them residency status, 
presidentclinton,inaugust1994,announcedthatboatpeopleandraftersfleeingcuba
would, like the haitians, be interdicted and taken to guantnamo. this new us policy 
towardcubanrafterswasconfirmedinajoint communique on migration issued by the 
cuban and us governments on september 9, 1994. the communique stated that cubans 
rescued at sea attempting to enter the united states will not be permitted to enter the 
united states, but instead will be taken to safe haven facilities outside the united states. 
in addition, the communique stated that the cuban government would take effective
measures in every way it possibly can to prevent unsafe departures using mainly persuasive 
methods(dos1994).
president george w. bush reverted to the policy of interdicting and summarily returning 
haitian boat people, including possible refugees, to haiti. when a wave of political violence 
in late february 2004 resulted in a second ouster of president aristide, and haitians once 
again took to boats, president george w. bush announced, i have made it abundantly 
clear to the coast guard that we will turn back any refugee that attempts to reach our 
shore (seper 2004).36 
theobamaadministrationhascontinuedhighseasinterdictionsandcursoryshipboard
screening. those found to have credible fears are brought to guantnamo where they 
undergoarefugeestatusdeterminationwithoutthebenefitoflegalrepresentation.thefew
who are recognized as refugees are held at guantnamo pending third-country resettlement; 
they are not considered for resettlement to the united states.37 
us  externalization  of  migration  controls  has  a  long  history  on  land  as  well.  in  1989, 
an internal us immigration and naturalization service (ins) memo called on the ins 
liaison  in  mexico  to  secure  the  assistance  of  mexico  and  central american  countries 
toslowdowntheflowofillegalaliensintotheunitedstates(frelick1991,2).injune
1989, the ins newsletter, commissioners communique, reported on cooperation with 
thegovernmentofmexicotostemtheflowofcentralamericansthroughthatcountry,
including the establishment of checkpoints along the transit corridors and the deportation 

36   remarkably, neither the white house nor the state department issued any correction to this use of the 
term refugee (frelick 2005).
37   information in this paragraph is derived from the meeting on interdiction in the caribbean, us department 
ofstate,onoctober29,2015,attendedbybillfrelick.

200

journal on migration and human securityof intercepted central americans (jones and roney 1989). while cooperation between 
usimmigrationofficialsandtheirmexicancounterpartshasebbedandflowedoverthe
years, the idea of pressuring and supporting mexico to control central american migration 
across its remote 500-mile southern border with guatemala has had a lasting appeal for us 
policymakers faced with the challenges of policing the nearly 2,000-mile us border with 
mexico. 
through  the  mrida  initiative,  a  cooperative  bilateral  security  agreement  between  the 
united states and mexico that dates from 2008,38 the us congress has appropriated about 
$2.5 billion in assistance to mexico, of which more than $1.3 billion in equipment and 
traininghasbeendeliveredtomexico,asofapril2015(seelkeandfinklea2015).one
of the four pillars of us security assistance to mexico through the mrida initiative is 
support to create a 21st century border (pillar 3). the goal is to [fa]cilitate legitimate 
commerce and movement of people while curtailing the illicit flow of drugs, people,
arms, and cash (us embassy-mexico 2014). while mrida initiative funding involves 
farmorethanmigrationcontrol,curtailingtheillicitflowof...peoplehasremained
an important priority for the united states (ibid.), as evidenced by events in the summer 
of 2014, when extreme gang violence and poverty in the central american countries of 
honduras, guatemala, and el salvador caused tens of thousands of people, many of them 
unaccompaniedminors,tofleetotheunitedstatesandmexico.
presidentobamacommittedhisadministrationtomeetingthesurgeofmigrantswithan
aggressive,unified,andcoordinatedfederalresponseonbothsidesoftheborder(white
house 2014a). he told congressional leaders that he intended surging law enforcement 
task  forces  in  cooperation  with  our  international  partners,  with  a  focus  on  stepped-up 
interdiction and prosecution (ibid.). a week later, he asked congress for an emergency 
supplemental  appropriation  of  $3.7  billion  to  comprehensively  address  this  urgent 
humanitarian situation (white house 2014b). the highest levels of us diplomacy were 
engaged to persuade mexico and the three central american source countries, el salvador, 
honduras, and guatemala, to create concrete ways that we can work together to stem the 
flowofmigrantstakingthedangeroustriptotheunitedstates(whitehouse2015a).39 
in direct response to the summer 2014 surge in unaccompanied central americans arriving 
attheusborder,theusdepartmentofhomelandsecurity(dhs)launchedoperation
coyote, which it said was designed to stem the flow of illegal central american
migration.40 the operation involved the deployment of dhs investigators to mexico and 
central america to share criminal intelligence with foreign partners and build capacity 
inhumansmugglingandhumantraffickingenforcement(hrw2016b,52).bytheend
ofmay2015,thisefforthadresultedin1,037criminalarrestsinmexicoandtheregion.41

38indecember2008,mexicoandtheunitedstatessignedthefirstletterofagreementforthemrida
initiative, a bilateral security agreement centered on four pillars: (1) disrupting capacity of organized crime 
tooperate,(2)institutionalizingcapacitytosustainruleoflaw,(3)creatingatwenty-firstcenturyborder
structure, and (4) building strong and resilient communities.
39presidentobama,vicepresidentbiden,andsecretaryofstatekerryallmetwithhighestlevelgovernment
officialsinmexicoandcentralamericaonthisissue.
40testimony by lev j. kubiak (assistant director of international operations of us immigration and
customs  enforcement)  before  the  house  subcommittee  on  border  and  maritime  security  (2015),  7-8, 
availableathttp://www.ice.gov/sites/default/files/documents/testimony/2015/150602kubiak.pdf.
41   ibid.

201

the impact of externalization of migration controlsthecongressionalresearchservice(crs)estimatedthatusdepartmentofstate(dos)
funding  for  equipment  and  training  to  support  immigration  enforcement  on  mexicos 
southern  border  would  exceed  $86.6  million  prior  to  the  enactment  of  the  fy  2015 
appropriation  (seelke  and  finklea  2015,  16).  congress  increased  the  presidents  $115 
millionrequestforfy2015mridainitiativebyanother$79million,andspecifiedthatit
was to be used for helping mexico secure its southern border and implement justice sector 
reforms(ibid.,7).significantfundingformexicanmridainitiativeprogramscontinuedin
theobamaadministrationsfy2016request.42additionalfundsalsoflowedtomexicos
militaryfromtheusdepartmentofdefenses(dod)counter-narcoticsbudgettobolster
its capacity to control mexicos southern border.43 
the  combination  of  funding  and  technical  support,  as  well  as  diplomatic  and  other 
pressures from the united states, spurred the mexican government to action. the same 
dayaspresidentobamas emergency supplemental budget request, july 8, 2014, mexican 
president enrique pea nieto announced the start of the programa frontera sur (southern 
border program). although a detailed program was never presented publicly, the mexican 
government  established  a  new  administrative  body  within  the  ministry  of  interior,  the 
officeofcoordinationforcomprehensivemigrationassistanceatthesouthernborder,to
coordinatebordercontrolandmigrationmanagement,andfederalofficialsweredesignated
to  manage  migration  policy  in  the  southern  mexican  states  of  campeche,  chiapas, 
quintana roo, and tabasco (poder ejecutivo 2014, 1, 2; monroy 2015). moreover, in 
september 2014, the new york times reported that under pressure from the united states 
...mexicoinrecentweekshastakenararesteptowardstemmingtheflowofmigrants,
sweeping[centralamericanmigrants]offtrains,settingupmoreroadwaycheckpointsand
raidinghotelsandflophouseswheretheycongregateontheirjourneynorth(villegasand
archibold 2014). 
apprehensions of non-mexican migrants along the southwestern border of the united states 
fellby57percentbetweenoctober2014andapril2015comparedtothesamemonthsthe
previous year, from 162,700 to 70,400 (nyt editorial board 2015). as early as september 
2014, when the number of central americans appearing at the us border decreased, dhs 

42   the state departments fy 2016 budget request included $39 million for the mexico economic support 
fund  to  support  the  continued  us-mexico  partnership  under  the  mrida  initiative  to  address  security 
threatsstemmingfromdrugtraffickingandviolentcrime;$81.5millionforcentralamericanregional
security initiative (carsi); $26 million for the caribbean basin regional security initiative (cbsi); $80 
million for international narcotics control and law enforcement (inl) mexico funds for the purposes of 
institutionalizing the rule of law, disrupting and dismantling criminal organizations, creating a 21st century 
border,  including  mexicos  southern  border,  and  building  strong  and  resilient  communities  through  the 
mrida initiative; $225 million for inl for carsi activities such as land border and maritime interdiction 
programs (and support[ing] civil society through access to justice[ and] protection of human rights); and 
$20millionforinlssupporttocbsitocontinueeffortstocombatillicittraffickingandorganizedcrime,
increase port and border security, and strengthen the rule of law through training and technical assistance 
(seedos2016,90-109).
43infy2011,dodprovidedmexico$50milliontoimprovesecurityalongthemexico-guatemala-
belizeborderoutof$84.7millionindodcounter-narcoticssupportfundingtomexicothatyear.dods
mexico-guatemala-belize border initiative provides training to troops patrolling mexicos southern border, 
communicationsequipment,andsupportfordevelopmentofmexicossurveillancecapacity.dodcounter-
narcotics funding for mexico continued after fy 2011with $83.5 million in fy 2012, $68.8 million in fy 
2013, and $50.8 million in fy 2014 (see seelke and finklea 2015, 17, 24; seelke and finklea 2013, 29).

202

journal on migration and human securitysecretary jeh johnson issued a press release showing the statistical drop and saying that 
the us government is pleased that the mexican government has itself taken a number of 
importantstepstointerdicttheflowofillegalmigrantsfromcentralamericaboundforthe
united states (johnson 2014).
in parallel, apprehensions of central american migrants in mexico rose by 75 percent, 
from 53,078 to 92,889 (secretaria de gobernacion 2013, 117; secretaria de gobernacion 
2014, 117; nyt editorial board 2015). mexicos national immigration institute (inm) 
reported a 79 percent increase in the number of central americans deported from mexico 
inthefirstfourmonthsof2015(stillman2015).
theusgovernmenthascharacterizedtheeffortstostemtheflowofcentralamerican
migrants to the us border as a success, and has given much of the credit for this success 
tomexicoforitsenhancedenforcementefforts.aspresidentobamasaidatajointwhite
house press conference with mexican president pea nieto on january 5, 2015:

iverymuchappreciatemexicoseffortsinaddressingtheunaccompaniedchildren
whowesawspikingduringthesummer.inpartbecauseofstrongeffortsbymexico,
including at its southern border, weve seen those numbers reduced back to much 
more manageable levels. 

(white house 2015b)
usexternalizationeffortsextendedtothecentralamericansourcecountriesaswell.in
june of 2014, honduran law enforcement units which had received funding and training 
fromthedosbureauofinternationalnarcoticsandlawenforcement(inl)launchedan
operation to intercept children and families attempting to cross the border from honduras 
into  guatemala  (jesuit  conference  2014,  2).  three  such  honduran  units  apparently 
collaboratedontwotacticaloperations,operationrescueangelandoperationcoyote
(ibid.). according to reports, all three units received equipment and special training from 
us  border  patrol,  us  immigration  and  customs  enforcement,  or  other  us  migration 
control and law enforcement entities (ibid.; honduras amuralla 2014; carcamo 2014a; 
carcamo 2014b).

b. australia

australiasmigration-controlexternalizationpolicy,calledthepacificsolution,dates
from august 2001 when the australian navy began interdicting migrants on the high seas 
(hathaway 2002; magner 2004). that month, a norwegian freighter, the tampa, rescued 
migrants from an overcrowded vessel and sought to bring them to australias christmas 
island, as the next place of safety  the proper place, according to international maritime 
law, to disembark people rescued from vessels in distress.44 after the norwegian ship captain 
defiedaustraliasorderandentereditsterritorialwaters,theaustralianmilitaryblocked
the tampaoffthecoastofchristmasisland,preventeditspassengersfromdisembarking,
and transferred them to an australian military vessel. 

44guidelinesonthetreatmentofpersonsrescuedatsea,internationalmaritimeorganization(imo)
doc. resolution msc. 167(78), annex 34, adopted by the maritime safety committee on may 20, 2004, at 
6.12-6.17. 

203

the impact of externalization of migration controlsduringtheweeks-longstand-offatsea,theaustralianparliamentpassedlegislationwith
the explicit objective of stemming the unauthorized maritime arrival of asylum seekers 
(hrw2002,12-13).amongotherprovisions,thelegislation,whichcameintoeffectinlate
september 2001, excised christmas island and other outlying territories from australian 
immigration law, thus prohibiting asylum seekers in these erstwhile australian territories 
from lodging asylum claims in australia (ibid.). 
whilethereisevidencetosuggestthataustralianofficialsexaminedtheusplaybookin
devisingthepacificsolutionandinmanyrespectsfollowedinthefootstepsoftheunited
states in its restrictive policies on asylum seekers who arrive by sea, they also added 
some new variations (magner 2004, 58). australias new twist on externalization excised 
australian territories, for immigration law purposes, by a stroke of the pen rather than 
through any extraterritorial actions, creating the sort of rights free zone that had proved 
so convenient for the united states at guantnamo (hrw 2002, 63).
duringseptemberandearlyoctober2001,australiadetainedirregularmaritimearrivals
on christmas island or on board australian naval ships and then transferred them to the 
pacific-islandcountry,nauru,ortopapuanewguinea,wheretheywereconfinedincamps.
(ibid., 12-13). at the time, nauru was not a party to the 1951 refugee convention and 
papua new guinea, though a party to the convention, had attached numerous reservations 
totheiraccessionanddidnothaveinplaceadequatelawsandstructurestoprovideeffective
protectiontorefugeesandasylumseekers(unhcr2010).australianimmigrationofficials
conducted refugee status determinations in nauru and papua new guinea but not for the 
purpose of granting asylum under australian law, but rather  as the united states was 
doing at guantnamo  to consider recognized refugees for discretionary resettlement; 
the asylum seekers in nauru and papua new guinea had no recourse under any national 
law to challenge the refugee status determinations (hrw 2002, 62-65). 
inlateoctober2001,australiaalsobeganinterdictingmigrantboatsandforciblyreturned
themtoindonesianwaters.indonesiawasnotified,butnospecificreceptionarrangements
were made and no agreement was in place guaranteeing the protection of the intercepted 
refugees from refoulement (ibid., 12-13).
refugee  processing  was  closed  at  manus  island  in  2004  and  at  nauru  in  2008.  nauru 
became a party to the refugee convention in 2011, but lacked the capacity to provide 
effectiveasylumproceduresandrefugeeprotection(unhcr2012b,38).45 
in july 2011 australia announced an arrangement to transfer irregular maritime asylum 
seekerstomalaysia,butaustraliashighcourthaltedthatplan,findingittobeprocedurally
invalid because of malaysias poor refugee protections and the risk of refoulement (phillips 
2014).46  the  high  court  ruling  ended  the  malaysia  deal,  but  the  parliament  scrapped 
the provision of the migration act upon which the high court had based its ruling, and 
switcheditsoffshoreprocessingschemeawayfrommalaysia,notapartytotherefugee

45   [t]here areno experienced refugee status determination decision makers in the government of nauru 
[and]nopoolofpersonsidentifiedtodotheindependentreviewsonthetribunalsenvisagedbytherecently
enacted refugee convention act of 2012. 
46plaintiffm70/2011v.ministerforimmigrationandcitizenship;plaintiffm106of2011v.ministerfor
immigration and citizenship (2011) 244 clr 144.

204

journal on migration and human securityconvention,  and  back  to  nauru  and  papua  new  guinea,  both  nominally  parties  to  the 
convention. 
inaugust2012,theoffshoreprocessingandothermeasuresbillauthorizedthegovernment
to transfer irregular migrants arriving by sea to nauru or to manus island, papua new 
guinea,wheretheywouldbeheldindefinitelywhiletheirrefugeeclaimswereprocessed
(hrw 2012). the legislation targeted only those asylum seekers who arrived irregularly 
by boat (ibid.). under the law, the claims of asylum seekers who arrived by air, even with 
improper documents, would continue to be processed while they remained in australia 
(ibid).onjuly19,2013,primeministerkevinruddannouncedthatallirregularmaritime
asylum seekers would be sent to manus and nauru for processing and that none found to 
be refugees would be resettled to australia (parliament of australia 2014).
in  december  2014,  the  australian  parliament  passed  legislation  that  removed  most 
references  to  the  refugee  convention  from australias  migration act  of  1958,  instead 
creating a new, independent and self-contained statutory framework to allow australia 
to pursue its own interpretation of its obligations under the convention (kcirl 2014). 
among other things, the legislation gave the minister of immigration and border protection 
extraordinary powers to detain people on the high seas and to transfer them to any country 
chosen by the minister, with very limited possibilities for judicial review (ibid). the new 
lawaddedthatthedesignationofacountrytobeanoffshoreprocessingcountryneed
not be determined by reference to the international obligations or domestic law of that 
country  (ibid).  prime  minister tony abbott  promoted  his  stop  the  boats  policies  as 
a  model  for  other  countries  confronting  the  challenge  of  irregular  migration,  including 
european countries (see norman 2015). 
australiahascontinuedandexpandedthepacificsolutionundertheabbottgovernment
(asrc  2015).  this  expansion  includes  a  regional  plan  by  australia,  indonesia,  sri 
lanka, and malaysia to deter migration by sharing intelligence and information about the 
identities of migrants, cooperating on naval patrols and border security, launching media 
campaigns to dissuade migration, and increasing the speed at which migrants are deported 
(the coalition 2014). the abbott and turnbull governments part in this plan has been 
directedbythemilitary-ledoperationsovereignborders,whichincludesajointagency
task force aimed at preventing people smuggling (kcirl 2015). under operation
sovereign borders, migrants who are not returned to their sending country continue to 
bedetainedforoffshoreprocessinginsubstandardconditions(australiaasylum2016;
ostrand2014).
thestatedguidingprincipleofaustraliaspacificsolutionhasbeentheno advantage 
test, to ensure that no benefit is gained through circumventing regular migration
arrangements.47 as a consequence of this approach, australia has refused the option of 
resettlement in australia to any refugees from nauru or papua new guinea. its search for 

47thelanguagequotedinthetextaboveappearsinthepreamblesofboththemouwithnauruandwith
papua new guinea (memorandum of understanding between the government of the independent state of 
papua new guinea and the government of australia relating to the transfer to and assessment of persons in 
papua new guinea, and related issues and memorandum of understanding between the republic of nauru 
and the commonwealth of australia relating to the transfer to and assessment of persons in nauru, and 
related issues). 

205

the impact of externalization of migration controlsthird countries willing to resettle refugees from its outsourcing centers led it to conclude a 
deal with cambodia in 2014 to accept refugees from nauru. the resettlement agreement, 
coupled with $40 million in development aid, ignored concerns about safety and the lack 
ofcapacityofthecambodiangovernment(hrw2015).thefirstgroupoffourrefugees
arrived in phnom penh in june 2015 at a cost to australia of another $15 million, but by 
march 2016 three of the original four had chosen to go back to their home countries rather 
than  remain  in  cambodia  (hasham  2016). with  two  additional  refugees  resettled  from 
nauru, there were only three such refugees still in cambodia, as of march 2016 (ibid). 
in april 2016, the supreme court of papua new guinea ruled that detention of asylum 
seekers and refugees on manus island violated papua new guineas constitution. the papua 
newguineaprimeministerthencalledontheaustraliangovernmenttofindalternative
arrangements for its detainees on manus island and to relocate refugees not wanting to stay 
there (hrw 2016d). 

c. the european union

in2003,britishprimeministertonyblairscabinetandhomeofficecirculatedapolicy
paper  called  a  new  vision  for  refugees,  which  proposed  that  the  european  union 
establish regional protection areas (rpas) near refugee-producing countries, which would 
havethepurposebothtocontainrefugeesincountriesoffirstarrivalandtoserveasplaces
to which asylum seekers that had arrived in europe could be deported (noll 2015). as 
proposed, returned asylum seekers as well as refugees arriving from their home countries 
would be processed in transit processing centers (tpcs) for possible resettlement in the 
europeanunion(ibid).findinginsufficientsupportfortheproposal,theunitedkingdom
withdrew it prior to the june 2003 european council meeting in thessaloniki, and it was 
never formally considered (hrw 2006, 5). but the new vision has persisted through the 
years and echoes loudly in the 2016 eu-turkey action plan for stemming the irregular 
flowofmigrantsandasylumseekersintotheeuropeanunion.
in september 2005, the european commission proposed regional protection programmes 
(rpps),  a  variation  on  the  new  visions  rpa.  rpps  purportedly  would  strengthen 
protectioncapacityintheregionsclosetorefugeeflows(europeancommission2005).
human rights watch noted at the time that while the rpps goals of strengthening the 
protection capacity and improving access to durable solutions in the target countries are 
laudable, [t]he rpps concept raises concerns . . . that the eu will use the existence of such 
programs as a pretext to declare the target countries safe third countries. the eu could 
then return asylum seekers and migrants who transited through these countries even though 
effectiveprotectioncouldnotbeguaranteed(hrw2006,4).
duringthenext10years,theeuropeanunioncontinueditseffortstoputexternalization
into practice through cooperation with key migration transit countries. in ukraine, at the 
time an important transit country for migrants and asylum seekers, the european union and 
its member states bordering ukraine provided resources, signed readmission agreements 
to  facilitate  summary  returns,  and  conditioned  closer  ties  on  kievs  cooperation  with 
migration-controleffortsthatledtoasylumseekersbeingwarehousedinthecountry(hrw
2010).inlibya,eumemberstateitalyledthewayinencouragingthegaddafigovernment

206

journal on migration and human securityto prevent migrants from departing its shores by boat for italy and malta and to accept the 
summary return of those who did depart, despite the abuses against migrants and asylum 
seekersandlackofeffectiveprotectioninthatcountry(hrw2009).
the european union has also pursued a series of eu-wide readmission agreements with 
third countries to facilitate not only the return of rejected asylum seekers and other migrants 
who are nationals of those countries but in the case of transit countries, the nationals of 
othercountries,amovedesignedinparttoovercomethepracticaldifficultiesofdeporting
rejected asylum seekers to some countries (rais 2016). 
thesafethirdcountryconceptwascodifiedineuropeintheasylumproceduresdirective
(apd), one of the key elements of the eus common european asylum system, in 2005.48 
after the apd passed, unhcr said that it may lead to breaches of international refugee 
law if no additional safeguards are introduced, and make it harder for refugees to have 
their asylum claims properly heard in europe. after the european commission proposed 
a revised (but still problematic) version of the apd in 2009,49 the un refugee agency in 
january 2012 said: 

unhcr  continues  to  question  the  utility  and  consistency  with  international 
refugee law of the european safe third country concept. no minimum principles 
and guarantees appear to govern the procedure under article 39 of the amended 
proposal. the implication is that access to territory and to an asylum procedure 
may be denied altogether to asylum seekers who may have protection needs. such 
a denial could be at variance with international refugee law. 

(unhcr 2012a) 
the political impact of the refugee crisis in europe in 2015, with the arrival of more than 
one-million people by sea, 84 percent of whom came from the worlds top 10 refugee-
producing countries, gave fresh impetus to the european unions interest in externalization 
(unhcr 2016e). the european union first sought to shift responsibility towards the
non-eu states on the western balkan migration route and then ultimately to turkey, the 
main transit country for the 850,000 arrivals in greece in 2015. at the same time, the 
europeanunionreneweditseffortstocreatemigrationpartnershipswithafricancountries,
establishing an emergency trust fund for africa in november 2015 with the explicit aim of 
reducing migration to europe (european commission 2015).
in march 2016, the european union and its member states used inducements of future visa-
free travel for turkish nationals, a renewed path toward eu membership, and billions of 
euros in aid to seek turkeys assistance in preventing syrian refugees from crossing into the 
europeanunion(europeancommission2016a).onmarch18,2016,theeuropeanunion
and turkey  came  to  a  formal  agreement to  return  all  new  irregular  migrants  crossing 
from turkey into greek islands back to turkey (ibid). the agreement states that such 
returns will take place in full accordance with eu and international law. the agreement 

48eudirective2005/85/ecof1december2005onminimumstandardsonproceduresinmemberstates
for granting and withdrawing refugee status.
49    proposal  for  a  directive  of  the  european  parliament  and  of  the  council  on  minimum  standards  on 
procedures in member states for granting and withdrawing international protection (recast) {sec(2009) 
1376} {sec(2009) 1377}/*com/2009/0554final-cod2009/0165*/, available at http://eur-lex.europa.eu/
legal-content/en/txt/?uri=com:2009:0554:fin.

207

the impact of externalization of migration controlscites the apd, and suggests that asylum requests from syrians, iraqis, afghans, and others 
arriving irregularly by boat from turkey will be ruled inadmissible because turkey will 
beidentifiedasasafethirdcountryorasafirstcountryofasylumtowhichasylum
seekers can be returned with less than full examination of their asylum claim (ibid.). 
at this writing the eu-turkey migration agreement is still in its infancy, but turkey in 
any case falls short of the apds criteria for either safe third country or country of 
firstasylum.50 importantly, any syrian, iraqi, or afghan returned to turkey would not 
be allowed to request refugee status there because turkey excludes non-europeans from 
qualifyingforrefugeestatus(kirici2005).syriansdo have access to temporary protection 
in turkey offering some access to assistance and more recently to the labor market,
althoughinpracticesignificantbarriersremain(hrw2016e).butiraqis,afghans,and
other nationalities of asylum seekers are not even eligible for temporary protection. the 
apd also requires the safe third country to respect the principle of non-refoulement, the 
prohibition on the forced return of refugees.51 that principle not only forbids governments 
from deporting refugees to places where their lives or freedom would be threatened but 
also from rejecting asylum seekers at their borders who would face such threats. at the 
very time the eu was announcing its migration control deal, turkey had closed its border 
totensofthousandsofsyriansfleeingamilitaryoffensiveinthenorthernsyriancityof
aleppo (hrw 2016a).
asofthiswriting,thedealsdeterrenteffectcoupledwiththeclosureofthewesternbalkan
migration route appears to be working; the number crossing the aegean sea has dropped 
dramatically (unhcr 2016a). but if no syrians reach greece by boat and the war in syria 
drags on, turkey will be left with an ever-growing refugee population. and while the deal 
envisions voluntary resettlement of syrians from turkey to the european union in exchange 
for the return of syrians from greece to turkey, the fate of non-syrians is far more uncertain. 
whatever the outcome of the eu-turkey deal, it is clear that externalization is now the 
main plank of eu migration policy. this was emphasized in june 2016, when the european 
commission announced a new migration partnership framework (european commission 
2016b). while there are positive elements in the framework, including the possibility of 
greater resettlement and other legal routes for migration, the overall approach is consistent 
withtheeuropeanunionseffortsduringtherefugeecrisistodeflectresponsibilityand
legal  obligations  away  from  eu  member  states  and  onto  transit  and  origin  countries, 
including through the eu-turkey deal. the short-term objectives of the framework are 
to save lives in the mediterranean sea; increase the rate of returns to countries of origin 
and transit; and enable migrants and refugees to stay close to home and to avoid taking 
dangerous journeys (ibid.).

50 eu directive 2013/32/eu of 26 june 2013 on common procedures for granting and withdrawing
international protection (recast), articles 35 and 38. 
51thedirectivealsosaysafirstcountryofasylumisacountrywheretheapplicanthasalreadybeen
recognized as a refugee or otherwise enjoys sufficient protection.asturkey does not recognize non-
europeans as refugees, the only remaining question is whether it provides de facto refugees sufficient
protection.accordingtounhcr,[t]hewordingsufficientprotection[intheapd]...doesnotrepresent
anadequatesafeguardwhendeterminingwhetheranasylumseekermaybereturnedtothefirstcountryof
asylum.eudirective2013/32/euof26june2013oncommonproceduresforgrantingandwithdrawing
international protection (recast), articles 35 and 38. as noted above, human rights law provides all migrants 
with legal protection against return to torture and other ill treatment independent of refugee law or status.

208

journal on migration and human securitywhile much of the framework restates long-standing policy approaches, the emphasis on 
economic development as the main tool to tackle root causes of migration, the choice of 
potential partners including governments, like sudan and eritrea, with poor records when 
itcomestoprotectinghumanrights,andtheefforttoconditiongeneraleuaidexplicitlyon
migration cooperation are worrying elements that will require close scrutiny in the months 
and years to come. 

for  promoting  government 

v.  recommendations 
migration policies protective of human rights
laws,  policies,  and  practices  that  externalize  migration  controls  are  rights-threatening, 
asdiscussedinsectioniii,whentheyhavetheintentionoreffectofblockingaccessto
territory in ways that frustrate the right of any person to leave their country of nationality 
or any other country, or the right of anyone to seek and enjoy asylum outside their country. 
theyarealsorights-threateningwhentheyhavetheeffect(ortheintention)ofcausing
or  making  more  likely  violations  of  other  human  rights  of  migrants,  including  asylum 
seekers. there is ample scope for destination or transit countries to engage in capacity 
building and to assist with migration management, including as part of supporting security 
screening and law enforcement, in ways that are consistent with international human rights 
law and standards. such laws, policies, and practices should be reformed to systematically 
and directly incorporate rights protections into migration management (including through 
increasing  the  protective  capacity  of  authorities  involved  in  migration  control  in  third 
countries), as well as to condition destination- and transit-state funding, training, and other 
assistance  to  third  countries  on  the  implementation  of  a  minimum  set  of  human  rights 
protections in law and in practice. 
rather than promoting the externalization of migration controls, states and other donors 
could  also  increase  support  to  regional  and  international  organizations  that  provide  or 
promote the protection of migrants rights, including the rights of asylum seekers, in third 
countries and countries of origin. such parallel resources could be directed to enhancing 
the  capacity  of  all  states  along  migration  routes,  including  through  robust  training  of 
immigrationandbordersecurityofficialsinhumanrightsandrefugeeprotections.these
couldinparticularincludeadvocacyandtrainingeffortstoensurethatofficialswithout
a  human  rights  or  refugee  protection  mandate,  but  whose  work  triggers  or  follows 
apprehension  and  processing  of  migrants,  such  as  border  guards  and  law  enforcement 
officials,understandandrespecttherightsofallofthemigrantstheyencounter.
finally,  states  and  other  donors  could  provide  increased  support  to  civil  society  actors 
whose  work  directly  or  indirectly  supports  protection  of  the  basic  needs  and  rights 
of  migrants,  refugees,  and  asylum  seekers,  including  humanitarian  protection.  these 
effortscouldbetargetedtocivilsocietyactorswell-positionedtoadvocateformigrants
and  asylum  seekers  rights.  it  is  particularly  important  that  international  human  rights 
organizations and civil society actors monitor the externalization of border control. there 
are several ways in which this can be done. to begin, civil society groups should educate 
each other on government practices in their regions. civil society can seek and disseminate 
information about government practices and regional dynamics, including through civil 
society platforms and networks, and organize and engage with international and regional 

209

the impact of externalization of migration controlshuman rights bodies that monitor states compliance with human rights laws. civil society 
groupscanalsodirectlyengagewithlawenforcementeffortsandseektoensuremigrants
and asylum seekers rights are not violated in the context of the prosecution of alleged 
criminals. in addition, civil society groups can engage in documentation and monitoring 
of  compliance  with  international  law  and  standards,  and  promote  the  incorporation  of 
international human rights law into domestic law. they also can promote accountability for 
those migration-control externalization policies and practices that violate human rights by, 
among other things, bringing legal challenges to border externalization in domestic courts 
and  international  and  regional  human  rights  bodies  whenever  externalization  policies 
contravene international or national law.
thefollowingarespecificpolicyrecommendationstargetedtostatesandcorrespondingto
the regional case studies in section iv above: 

to the united states

1.  stop  the  high  seas  interdiction,  shipboard  screening,  and  summary  returns  of 
irregular  maritime  migrants  and  asylum  seekers  in  the  caribbean  or  elsewhere. 
do  not  outsource  screening  and  refugee  processing  to  the  us  naval  base  at 
guantnamo  bay,  cuba,  but  rather  bring  all  individuals  expressing  a  need  for 
international protection to the territorial united states to have their claims assessed. 
2.  redirect funding and support for mexicos southern border program away from 
interception of central american migrants and asylum seekers and to improving 
mexicos capacity to protect, receive, and process asylum seekers, including by 
improving its capacity to provide them social support while their claims for refugee 
status or other forms of protection are pending.also, increase efforts to assist
mexico to integrate recognized refugees.

3.  condition any us funding of third countries engaged in immigration and border 
control  on  their  demonstrated  compliance  with  anti-corruption  measures  and 
national and international human rights standards.

4.  do  not  use  us  aid  money  to  increase  border  militarization  aimed  at  stopping 

migrants from leaving their home countries in search of international protection. 

to australia 

1.  endthepolicyofoffshoredetentionandprocessingofasylumseekersinnauru,
manusisland,orinanyothersitesthatunableorunwillingtoprovideeffective
rights protections to asylum seekers.

2.  stop  the  policy  of  turning  back  migrants  and  asylum  seekers  arriving  by  boat 
to  countries  of  origin  or  countries  of  transit,  such  as  indonesia,  sri  lanka,  and 
vietnam, after cursory screening. 

3.  allow  irregularly  arriving  maritime  asylum  seekers  to  have  their  claims  for 
protection heard in australia and provide asylum in australia for those found to be 
deserving of international protection.

4.  offerthepossibilityofsettlementinaustraliatoallrefugeescurrentlyinnauruand

manus island.

210

journal on migration and human securityto the european union

1.  do not designate or otherwise treat turkey or any other country as a safe third 
countryorasafirstcountryofasylumforthereturnofasylumseekersunlessit
meets the following principles:
a.   the country in law and practice provides for refugee status or a status that 
is equivalent to that required by the 1951 refugee convention or its 1967 
protocol to people of all nationalities deserving of international protection.

b.   the country provides a legal regime, such as a temporary protection regime, to 
ensurethatmigrantsarenotreturnedtoacountryexperiencingarmedconflict
and indiscriminate violence where they face a risk of serious harm. the legal 
regime must also carry with it the possibility of refugee status, including for 
situations that become protracted.

c.   the country protects the labor rights of lawfully present refugees and the 

beneficiariesofcomplementaryortemporaryprotection.inparticular,
the country must protect the right to work, such as by providing work 
authorization and access to the labor market.

d.   the country protects the rights to health and to education for recognized 

refugeesaswellasbeneficiariesofcomplementaryortemporaryprotection,
and provides access to social services.

e.   the country protects the rights of liberty and security of recognized refugees 

aswellasbeneficiariesofcomplementaryortemporaryprotection,and
refrains from detaining asylum seekers, particularly children, on the grounds 
of illegal entry or stay. 

f.   the country demonstrates respect for the principle of non-refoulement, 

includingprohibitinganypracticethatcouldhavetheeffectofreturningan
asylum seeker or refugee to places where they would face serious risk of 
violation of fundamental human rights, where their lives or freedom would 
be threatened, or where they would be at risk of persecution, torture, or 
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, including through 
interception, rejection at the frontier, or indirect refoulement. 

2.  do  not  use  the  turkish  or  libyan  or  other  third-country  coastguards  or  border 
guards to prevent would-be asylum seekers from exercising their rights to leave 
any country or to seek asylum.

3.  do not make assistance through the eu-africa trust fund, the khartoum process, 
or any other migration compact under the eu partnership framework conditional 
on african or other countries preventing individuals from leaving their countries 
of nationality or habitual residence, but rather help to build the capacity of those 
countries to respect and protect human rights and to address development needs. 

4.  abrogate  the  unfair  and  unworkable  dublin  regulation  system  for  determining 
eu member state responsibility for examining asylum claims based on the country 
offirstarrivalandinitsplaceinstituteamechanismforassigningresponsibility
for examining asylum claims to member states according to each states assessed 
capacity,  while  taking  into  consideration  the  dignity,  autonomy,  and  wishes  of 
asylumseekersandrightstofamilyunityandreunification.

211

the impact of externalization of migration controlsreferences
aclu (american civil liberties union). 2014. human rights situation of migrant and 
refugee  children  and  families  in  the  united  states.  hearing  before  the  inter-
american commission on human rights, 153rd ordinary period of sessions,
october27.https://www.aclu.org/files/assets/iachr_-_human_rights_situation_of_
migrant_and_refugee_children_and_families_in_the_united_states-v2.pdf.

andrijasevic,rutvica.2010.deported:therighttoasylumateusexternalborder
of italy and libya. international migration 48(1). https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-
2435.2009.00554.x.

asrc(asylumseekerresourcecentre).2015.timelineofevents.http://www.asrc.

org.au/resources/fact-sheet/timeline-of-events/.

atger, anas faure, ed. 2013. shifting borders: externalising migrant vulnerabilities and 
rights? brussels:redcrosseuoffice.http://www.redcross.eu/en/news-events/
news-room/previous-news/rceu-publication-shifting-borders-
booklet/.

australiaasylum:whyisitcontroversial?2016.bbc news,april29.http://www.bbc.

com/news/world-asia-28189608.

betts, alexander. 2010. towards a soft law framework for the protection of vulnerable 
irregular  migrants.  international  journal  of  refugee  law  22(2).  https://doi.
org/10.1093/ijrl/eeq018.

carcamo, cindy. 2014a. elite honduran unit works to stop flow of children to the u.s. 
los angeles times,july9.http://www.latimes.com/world/mexico-americas/la-fg-
ff-honduras-border-20140709-story.html#page=1.

. 2014b. wrenches thrown into careful plans to flee honduras. los angeles 
times, october 12. http://www.latimes.com/world/mexico-americas/la-fg-ff-
honduras-journey-narrative-20141012-1-story.html#page=1.

the  coalition.  2013.  the  coalitions  policy  for  a  regional  deterrence  framework  to 
combatpeoplesmuggling.barton,australia:thecoalition.http://www.nationals.
org.au/portals/0/2013/policy/13-08-23%20the%20coalition%e2%80%99s%20
policy%20for%20a%20regional%20deterrence%20framework%20to%20
combat%20people%20smuggling.pdf.

council of the european union. 2005. presidency conclusions of the brussels european 
council. brussels: council of the european union. http://www.statewatch.org/
news/2005/dec/eu-summit-concl-dec-05.pdf.

crpeau,  franois.  2013.  regional  study:  management  of  the  external  borders  of  the 
european union and its impact on the human rights of migrants.geneva:office
of the united nations high commissioner for human rights.

dos(usdepartmentofstate).1994.us-cubajointcommuniqueonmigration.dispatch.
new york: september 9. http://heinonline.org/hol/landingpage?handle=hein.
journals/dsptch12&div=87&id=&page.

212

journal on migration and human security.2012.programandbudgetguidefy2013.washington,dc:dos,bureauof

internationalnarcoticsandlawenforcementaffairs.

.2015.meetingoninterdictioninthecaribbean,attendedbybillfrelick,october

29.

. foreign operations and related programs. 2016. budget justification for fy

european  commission.  2005.  communication 

2016.washington,dc:dos.http://www.state.gov/s/d/rm/rls/ebs/2016/.
the  commission 

the 
council  and  the  european  parliament  on  regional  protection  programmes. 
brussels: european commission. http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/en/
txt/?uri=celex:52005dc0388.

from 

to 

.  2015.  president  juncker  launches  the  eu  emergency  trust  fund  to  tackle 
root causes of irregular migration in africa. press release. brussels: european 
commission.http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_ip-15-6055_en.htm.

.  2016a.  eu-turkey  statement.  press 

european
releases/2016/03/18-eu-turkey-statement/.

commission.

release,  march  18.  brussels: 
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-

.  2016b.  communication  from  the  commission  to  the  european  parliament, 
the  european  council  and  the  european  investment  bank  on  establishing  a 
new partnership framework with third countries under the european agenda 
on migration. strasbourg: european commission. http://ec.europa.eu/dgs/
home-affairs/what-we-do/policies/european-agenda-migration/proposal-
implementation-package/docs/20160607/communication_external_aspects_eam_
towards_new_migration_ompact_en.pdf.

frelick, bill. 1991. running the gauntlet: the central american journey through mexico. 
u.s. committee for refugees january. quoting internal ins memorandum. 1988.
______.1996.whosonfirst?thecanada-u.s.memorandumofagreementonasylum.

interpreter releases (73, 8), february 26. 

. 2005. abundantly clear: refoulement. georgetown immigration law journal 

19(2).

. 2015a. tone down the scaremongering over migrants. newyork: human
https://www.hrw.org/news/2015/08/10/dispatches-tone-down-

rights watch.
scaremongering-over-migrants. 

. 2015b. time to ditch dublin: shift the migrant burden to the country of first 

application, not first arrival. politico. september 8.

gammeltoft-hansen, thomas. 2011. access to asylum: international refugee law and 
the globalization of migration control. cambridge: cambridge university press.
https://doi.org/10.1017/cbo9780511763403. 

.  2014.  the  law  and  politics  of  non-entre.  lecture  given  at  the  university 

213

the impact of externalization of migration controlsof oxford, june 4. http://www.rsc.ox.ac.uk/events/the-law-and-politics-of-non-
entree.

gordon, michael r. 1994. in shift, u.s. will no longer admit haitians at sea. the new 
york  times, july 6. http://www.nytimes.com/1994/07/06/world/in-shift-us-will-
no-longer-admit-haitians-at-sea.html.

guatemala  human  rights  commission.  2015.  civil  society  organizations  express 
urgent concerns about proposed alliance for prosperity plan for the northern 
triangle  during  summit  of  the  americas. http://www.ghrc-usa.org/wp-content/
uploads/2015/04/final-letter-to-presidents-at-summit-of-the-americas.pdf.

haddad, emma. 2008. the external dimension of eu refugee policy: a new approach 
toasylum?government and opposition 43(190). https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1477-
7053.2007.00250.x.

hasham, nicole. 2016. blow to australias $55 million cambodia deal as two more 
refugees quit. sydney morning herald,may8.http://www.smh.com.au/federal-
politics/political-news/blow-to-australias-55-million-cambodia-deal-as-two-
more-refugees-reportedly-leave-20160308-gnda8q.html.

hathaway,  james  c.  2002.  refugee  law  is  not  immigration  law.  world  refugee 

survey:38-45.

. 2005. the rights of refugees under international law. cambridge: cambridge 

university press.

honduras  amuralla  con  militares  las  fronteras  hacia  guatemala.  la  tribuna,  july 
http://www.latribuna.hn/2014/07/29/honduras-amuralla-con-militares-las-

29.
fronteras-hacia-guatemala/.

hrw(humanrightswatch).2002.byinvitationonly:australianasylumpolicy.

december 14(10): 62-65. 

. 2006. european union: managing migration means potential eu complicity in 
neighboring states abuse of migrants and refugees.newyork:hrw.https://
www.hrw.org/report/2006/10/17/managing-migration-means-potential-eu-
complicity-neighboring-states-abuse-migrants. 

. 2009. pushed back, pushed around: italys forced return of boat migrants and 
asylum seekers, libyas mistreatment of migrants and asylum seekers. new york: 
hrw.https://www.hrw.org/report/2009/09/21/pushed-back-pushed-around/italys-
forced-return-boat-migrants-and-asylum-seekers.

. 2010. buffeted in the borderland: the treatment of asylum seekers and migrants 
in  ukraine. new york: hrw. https://www.hrw.org/report/2010/12/16/buffeted-
borderland/treatment-asylumseekers-and-migrants-ukraine.

.2014.australia:pacificsolutionredux:stilldiscriminatory,arbitrary,unfair,
inhumane. new york: hrw. https://www.hrw.org/news/2012/08/17/australia-
pacific-solution-redux.

214

journal on migration and human security.  2015.  world  report  2015:  australia. new york: hrw. https://www.hrw.org/

world-report/2015/country-chapters/australia.

.  2016a.  turkey:  let  stranded  syrians  seek  protection:  45,000  caught 
betweenaleppo fighting and border. newyork: hrw. https://www.hrw.org/
news/2016/02/10/turkey-let-stranded-syrians-seek-protection.

.  2016b.  closed  doors:  mexicos  failure  to  protect  central  american  refugee 
and migrant children.newyork:hrw.https://www.hrw.org/report/2016/03/31/
closed-doors/mexicos-failure-protect-central-american-refugee-and-migrant-
children. 

.2016c.turkey:openbordertosyriansfleeingisis:atleast30,000trapped
amid northern syrian fighting. new york: hrw. https://www.hrw.org/
news/2016/04/14/turkey-open-borders-syrians-fleeing-isis.

.  2016d.  papua  new  guinea: address abuses  at  un  review:  make  good  on 
commitmenttoclosemanusdetentioncenter.newyork:hrw.https://www.
hrw.org/news/2016/05/04/papua-new-guinea-address-abuses-un-review.

. 2016e. eu: dont send syrians back to turkey: lack of jobs, school, health 
care  spurs  poverty,  exploitation.  new  york:  hrw.  https://www.hrw.org/
news/2016/06/20/eu-dont-send-syrians-back-turkey.

hyndman,jennifer,andalisonmountz.2008.anotherbrickinthewall?neo-refoulement
and  the  externalization  of asylum  by australia  and  europe.  government  and 
opposition 43(249). https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1477-7053.2007.00251.x. 

ifrc (international federation of red cross and red crescent societies). 2015. statement 

on the valletta summit on migration. 

ilc (international law commission). 2001. draft articles on responsibility of states for 
internationally wrongful acts.gaor53rdsess.a/56/10.http://legal.un.org/ilc/
texts/instruments/english/commentaries/9_6_2001.pdf.

imbr (international migrants bill of rights). 2014. georgetown immigration law journal 

28:9-22. http://www.law.georgetown.edu/academics/centers-institutes/isim/
imbr/imbr-tools/upload/03-international-migrants-bill-of-rights.pdf.

imo(internationalmaritimeorganization).2004.guidelines on the treatment of persons 
rescued  at  sea.  maritime  safety  committee.  may  20.  doc.  resolution  msc. 
167(78), annex 34.

isaacson, adam, maureen meyer, and gabriela morales. 2014. mexicos other border: 
security, migration, and the humanitarian crisis at the line with central america. 
washington,dc:washingtonofficeonlatinamerica.http://www.wola.org/files/
mxgt/report/.

jesuitconferenceoftheunitedstatesandcanadaandthewashingtonofficeonlatin
america. 2014. support and assistance for interdictions, interceptions and border 

215

the impact of externalization of migration controlssecurity measures in mexico, honduras, and guatemala undermine access to 
international  protection.  written  testimony  presented  to  the  inter-american 
commission on human rights. http://jesuits.org/assets/publications/file/us_
border_externalization_2014_v1.pdf.

johnson,  jeh.  2014.  statement  about  the  situation  along  the  southwest  border.  press 
release. washington, dc: us department of homeland security. http://www.
dhs.gov/news/2014/09/08/statement-secretary-johnson-about-situation-along-
southwest-border#.

jones,janelle,andlisaroney.1989.operationholdthelinesucceedsincuttingthe
flow of illegals into south texas. commissioners communique. washington, 
dc: immigration and naturalization service.

kcirl  (andrew  and  renata  kaldor  centre  for  international  refugee  law).  2014. 
legislative  brief:  migration  and  maritime  powers  legislation  amendment 
(resolving the asylum legacy caseload) act 2014. sydney: university of new 
south wales. http://www.kaldorcentre.unsw.edu.au/sites/default/files/homepage/
legislative_brief_migration_amendment_resolving_the_asylum_legacy_
caseload_act_rev_5_12_014.pdf.

. 2015. turning back boats factsheet. sydney: university of new south wales. 

http://www.kaldorcentre.unsw.edu.au/publication/%e2%80%98turning-back-
boats%e2%80%99.

kirici, kemal. 2005. to  lift  or  not  to  lift  the  geographical  limitation  to  the  1951 
geneva convention relating to the status of refugees: turkeys pre-accession to 
the eu and asylum. http://edam.org.tr/document/kirisci2.pdf.

korthuis, aaron.  2014.  the  central america  regional  security  initiative  in  honduras. 
workingpaperpreparedforthewoodrowwilsoncenter,september.https://www.
wilsoncenter.org/sites/default/files/carsi%20in%20honduras.pdf.

magner,tara2004.alessthanpacificsolutionforasylumseekersinaustralia.

international journal of refugee law 16(1). https://doi.org/10.1093/ijrl/16.1.53.

mattila, heikki s. 2000. protection of migrants human rights: principles and practice. 

international migration 38(53).

monroy, jorge. 2015. desaparecen coordinacin de temas migrantes. el economista, 
http://eleconomista.com.mx/sociedad/2015/08/06/desaparecen-

6.

august
coordinacion-temas-migrantes. 

noll,  gregor.  2015.  visions  of  the  exceptiona.  open  democracy,  september  28, 
repostedfromjune2003.https://www.opendemocracy.net/gregor-noll/visions-of-
exceptional.

norman, jane. 2015. tony abbott urges europe to adopt stronger border protection 
policies  following  migrant  boat  sinkings.  radio  australia, april 21. http://
www.radioaustralia.net.au/international/2015-04-21/tony-abbott-urges-

216

journal on migration and human securityeurope-to-adopt-stronger-border-protection-policies-following-migrant-boat-
sinking/1439284.

nyt  editorial  board.  2015.  central americas  unresolved  migrant  crisis.  new  york 
times, june 16. http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/16/opinion/central-americas-
unresolved-migrant-crisis.html?_r=0.

ogata,sadako.1995.statementtothethirdcommitteeoftheunitednationsgeneral
assembly,  november  20.  new  york:  united  nations.  http://www.unhcr.
org/3ae68fbe0.html. 

orozco,manuelandjuliayansura.2015.removed,returnedandresettled:challenges
of  central american  migrants  back  home.  washington,  dc:  inter-american 
dialogue. 
http://www.thedialogue.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/central-
america-return-migration_final_formatted.pdf.

ostrand,nikki.2014.immigration control beyond australias border. new york: center 
for migration studies. http://cmsny.org/immigration-control-beyond-australias-
border/.

parliament of australia. 2014. a comparison of coalition and labor government asylum 
policies in australia since 2001.canberra:parliamentofaustralia.http://www.
aph.gov.au/about_parliament/parliamentary_departments/parliamentary_
library/pubs/rp/rp1314/asylumpolicies.

phillips, nicholas. 2014. carsi in guatemala: progress, failure, and uncertainty. working 
paper prepared for the woodrow wilson center, september 10. https://www.
wilsoncenter.org/publication/carsi-guatemala-progress-failure-and-uncertainty. 

plaut,  martin.  2015.  europe  dealing  with  african  dictators  to  keep  migrants  out. 
worldpress.com, may 16. https://martinplaut.wordpress.com/2016/05/16/europe-
dealing-with-african-dictators-to-keep-migrants-out/.

poder ejecutivo: secretaria de gobernacin: decreto por el que se crea la coordinacin 
para  la  atencin  integral  de  la  migracin  en  la  frontera  sur.  2014.  official 
gazette of mexico, july 8.

podkul,  jennifer,  and  ian  kysel.  2015.  interdiction,  border  externalization,  and  the 
protection  of  the  human  rights  of  migrants.  working  paper  prepared  for the 
inter-american commission on human rights, october 22. https://www.law.
georgetown.edu/academics/centers-institutes/human-rights-institute/our-work/
projects/upload/wrc-hri-border-externalization_oct-2015.pdf.

rais,  mehdi.  2016.  european  union  readmission  agreements.  forced  migration 
review 51(january).http://www.fmreview.org/sites/fmr/files/fmrdownloads/en/
destination-europe/rais.pdf.

secretaria  de  gobernacion.  2013.  boletn  mensual  de  estadsticas  migratorias  2013. 
unidaddepolticamigratoriacentrodeestudiosmigratorios.d.f,mexico.http://
www.wola.org/files/2013_inm_stats.pdf.

217

the impact of externalization of migration controls.  2014.  boletn  mensual  de  estadsticas  migratorias  2014.  unidad  de  poltica 
migratoria centro de estudios migratorios. d.f, mexico. http://www.wola.org/
sites/default/files/boletin2014_.pdf.

seelke, clare ribando, and kristin finklea. 2013. u.s.-mexican security cooperation: 
the  mrida  initiative  and  beyond.  washington,  dc:  congressional  research 
service.
http://www.law.umaryland.edu/marshall/crsreports/crsdocuments/
r41349_06122013.pdf.

.  2015.  u.s.-mexican  security  cooperation:  the  mrida  initiative  and  beyond. 
washington, dc: congressional research service. https://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/
row/r41349.pdf.

seper, jerry. 2004. coast guard repatriates haitians. washington times, february 28.
spijkerboer, thomas.  2013.  moving  migrants,  states,  and  rights:  human  rights  and 

migrant death. law and ethics of human rights 7-2.

stillman,amy.2015.mexicosminefieldformigrants.irin,june29.http://newirin.

irinnews.org/mexico-minefield-migrants.

taft-morales, maureen, and mark p. sullivan. 1993. haiti: the struggle for democracy 
and congressional concerns in 1993. issue brief no. 1b93036. washington, dc: 
congressional research service. 

unfpa (united nations population fund). 2016. migration. http://www.unfpa.org/

migration.

unhcr (united nations high commissioner for refugees) executive committee. 1979. 
refugees without an asylum country. no.85(xxx).http://www.unhcr.org/en-us/
excom/exconc/3ae68c960/refugees-asylum-country.html.

unhcr. 1984. unhcr cartagena declaration on refugees, november 22. unhcr, 

http://www.unhcr.org/about-us/background/45dc19084/cartagena-declaration-
refugees-adopted-colloquium-international-protection.html. 

. 1993. un high commissioner for refugees responds to u.s. supreme court 

decision in sale v. haitian centers council. international legal materials 32.

.  2003.  summary  conclusions  on  the  concept  of  effective  protection  in  the 
context  of  secondary  movements  of  refugees  and  asylum  seekers.  libson: 
unhcrhttp://www.refworld.org/docid/3fe9981e4.html.

.  2007a.  unhcr,  refugee  protection  and  international  migration.  geneva: 

unhcr.http://www.unhcr.org/4a24ef0ca2.pdf.

. 2007b. advisory opinion on the extraterritorial application of non-refoulement 
obligations under the 1951 convention relating to the status of refugees and its 
1967 protocol.geneva:unhcr.http://www.unhcr.org/4d9486929.html.

. 2010.  submission  by  the  united  nations  high  commissioner  for  refugees  for 
the  office  of  the  high  commissioner  for  human  rights  compilation  report  - 

218

journal on migration and human securityuniversal periodic review: papua new guinea.geneva:unhcr.http://www.
refworld.org/pdfid/4ccfe3cf2.pdf.

. 2012a. unhcr comments on the european commissions amended proposal for 
a directive of the european parliament and of the council on common procedures 
for  granting  and  withdrawing  international  protection  status  (recast)  com 
(2011)  319  final. geneva: unhcr. http://www.refworld.org/docid/4f3281762.
html.

. 2012b. unhcr mission to the republic of nauru: 3-5 december report. canberra: 
unhcr. http://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/2012-12-14%2bn
auru%2bmonitoring%2breport%2bfinal.pdf.

.  2014.  world  at  war:  unhcr  global  trends  forced  displacement  in  2014. 

geneva:unhcr.http://www.unhcr.org/556725e69.html.

.2016a.unhcrdataportalgreece.https://t.co/0a9ga4dzg3.
.  2016b.  unhcr  refugees  and  migrants    frequently  asked  questions. 
http://www.unhcr.org/uk/news/latest/2016/3/56e95c676/refugees-

unhcr.
migrants-frequently-asked-questions-faqs.html. 

. 2016c. global trends: forced displacement in 2015. geneva: unhcr. http://
www.unhcr.org/en-us/news/latest/2016/6/5763b65a4/global-forced-displacement-
hits-record-high.html

. 2016d. refugees/migrants emergency response-mediterranean. http://data.

unhcr.org/medportalviz/dist/.

unhrc (un human rights committee). 1992. general comment no. 20 (1992),hri/

gen/1/rev.1,28july1994.

. 2004. general comment no. 31 [80]. the nature of the general legal obligation 
imposed  on  states  parties  to  the  covenant. ccpr/c/21/rev.1/add.13. http://
www.refworld.org/docid/478b26ae2.html.

unodc(unitednationsofficeondrugsandcrime).2004.united nations convention 
against transnational organized crime and the protocols thereto. vienna, austria: 
unodc.
https://www.unodc.org/documents/treaties/untoc/publications/
toc%20convention/tocebook-e.pdf.

. 2015. migrant smuggling in asia: current trends and related challenges. bangkok, 
thailand: unodc. http://www.unodc.org/documents/southeastasiaandpacific/
publications/2015/som/current_trends_and_related_challenges_web.pdf.

unohchr(unitednationsofficeofthehighcommissioneronhumanrights).2014.
recommended  principles  and  guidelines  on  human  rights  at  international 
borders.geneva,switzerland:ohchr.http://www.ohchr.org/documents/issues/
migration/ohchr_recommended_principles_guidelines.pdf.

us  embassy-mexico.  2014.  the  mrida  initiativean  overview.  fact sheet. http://

219

the impact of externalization of migration controlsphotos.state.gov/libraries/mexico/310329/july2014/merida-initiative-overview-
jul14.pdf.

villegas,  paulina,  and  randal  c. archibold.  2014.  mexico  makes  route  tougher  for 
migrants. new york times, september21.http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/22/
world/americas/mexico-makes-route-tougher-for-migrants.html.

vonsternberg,markr.2014.reconfiguringthelawofnon-refoulement:procedural
and  substantive  barriers  for  those  seeking  to  access  surrogate  international 
human rights protection. journal on migration and human security (2)4. http://
dx.doi.org/10.14240/jmhs.v2i4.39.

wasem, ruth ellen. 2011. u.s. immigration policy on haitian migrants. washington, dc: 
congressional research service, january 21. http://www.uscg.mil/history/docs/
crs/crs_rs21349.pdf.

whitehouse.2014a.letterfromthepresidenteffortstoaddressthehumanitarian
situation in the rio grande valleyareas of our nations southwest border.
washington, dc: white house, office of the press secretary. https://www.
whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2014/06/30/letter-president-efforts-address-
humanitarian-situation-rio-grande-valle. 

.  2014b.  letter  from  the  president    regarding  emergency  supplemental 
appropriations  request  to address  the  increase  in  child  and adult  migration 
from central america in the rio grande valley areas of the southwest border; 
andwildfire suppression.washington, dc:white house, office of the press
secretary.
https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2014/07/08/letter-
president-regarding-emergency-supplemental-appropriations-request.

.2015a.theobamaadministrationsgovernment-wideresponsetoinfluxof
central american  migrants  at  the  southwest  border.  washington,  dc:  white 
house, office of the press secretary. https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-
office/2014/08/01/obama-administration-s-government-wide-response-influx-
central-american-.

. 2015b. remarksby presidentobamaandpresidentpeanietoafterbilateral
meeting.washington, dc:white house, office of the press secretary. https://
www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/01/06/remarks-president-obama-and-
president-pe-nieto-after-bilateral-meeting.

220

journal on migration and human security