book review 
mrs. shipleys ghost: the right to 
travel and terrorist watchlists 
by jeffrey kahn. ann arbor, mi: university of michigan 
press, 2013. 360 pages.

susan ginsburg
us civil security llc

the  1948  universal  declaration  of 
human rights affirmed in article 13 that 
[e]veryone  has  the  right  to  leave  any 
country,  including  his  own,  and  to  return 
to his country. in response to the soviet 
unions  and  chinas  prohibitive  controls 
over the travel of their citizens, article 13 
recognized the right of individual citizens 
to  take  trips  to  other  countries  willing  to 
receive them, knowing that they may return 
home at the end of their foreign stays.  
neither  the  declaration  nor  its  offspring, 
the  1966  covenant  on  civil  and  political 
rights,  which  expands  on  freedom  of 
movement, sought to enlarge the rights of 
peoples to migrate at will, or to undermine 
the sovereignty of national borders and visa 
systems.  but the importance of individual 
travel  as  a  fundamental  civil  liberty  has 
grown  exponentially  as  globalization 
beckons individuals to travel for work and 
family  purposes.    now  counterterrorism, 
with  its  growing  reliance  on  a  watchlist 
of  travelers  who  may  be  prohibited  from 
flying  or  other  activities,  has  highlighted 
the need to understand the legal framework 
buttressing this civil liberty.  

largely  unpublicized,  post-9/11 
the 
watchlist-based  limitation  on  the  right 
of  us  citizens  to  travel  is  the  subject 
of  jeffrey  kahns  book,  mrs.  shipleys 
ghost:  the  right  to  travel  and  terrorist 
watchlists.  his purpose is to spotlight the 
expansion  of  a  debilitating  impingement 
on  individual  lives  and  to  vindicate  the 
right of americans to exercise freedom of 
travel and  especially,  to  be  able  to  return 
to the united states after traveling abroad.  
toward that end, kahn, a professor of law 
at  southern  methodist  university  and  a 
specialist on human rights, has woven an 
elegant and authoritative four-part book.  
the  first  section,  fact,  describes  the 
problem as it has manifested itself since 9/11 
in the form of startled us citizen travelers 
being  halted  at  their  foreign  departure 
points and prohibited from flying home to 
the united states.  next, law examines 
freedom of movement and the constitution 
as well as a brief history of the passport.  
then,  policy  recounts  the  history  of 
prohibitions on us citizen travel, reaching 
into  the  cold  war  past  to  sketch  a  vivid 
portrait  of  the  redoubtable  mrs.  shipley 
who  exercised  near  absolute  control  over 

 2014 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 2 number 2 (2014): 73-75journal on migration and human security

available 

to 

us passport issuance from 1928 to 1955.  
finally, principle invokes the provisions 
of the constitution that kahn suggests can 
help  courts  and  policymakers  to  exorcise 
mrs. shipleys ghost from travel law and 
practice.  
according  to  the  fbi,  which  runs  the 
terrorist  screening  center  (tsc),  the 
location  of  a  consolidated,  all-source 
watchlist 
government 
agencies,  there  are  over  20,000  names 
on tscs  no-fly  list. the transportation 
security administrations  (tsas)  secure 
flight  program  filters  ticketed  passengers 
against  the  list  (often  long  before  they 
arrive  at  the  airport)  and  then  issues 
orders to the airlines about whom to deny 
a  boarding  pass.  approximately  500  no-
fly  list  names  belong  to  us  citizens  (the 
number  varies  and  has  been  higher),  and 
21,000 presumably to resident aliens. the 
public has no way of knowing how many 
of  these  individuals  have  been  blocked 
from returning home to the united states. 
occasionally a media story surfaces, such 
as  in  october  2013  when  the  ny  daily 
news  reported  that  a  queens  man,  samir 
suljovic,  26,  was  blocked  from  returning 
from  vienna,  austria.  kahn  tells  several 
troubling 
former  military 
veterans  and  others  suddenly  barred 
without  explanation  from  coming  home.  
most of them have been muslims, and not 
accused of terrorism.    
the eponymous mrs. shipley stands at the 
heart of the book, as the historical antecedent 
to sweeping executive branch control over 
an individuals right to travel.  as director of 
the passport division of the us department 
of  state  during  the  cold war,  she  denied 
passports  to  individuals  whose  travel  she 
determined  was  not  in  the  interests  of 
the united states, a vague and expansive 
category  into  which american  luminaries 
such as paul robeson, linus pauling, and 

stories  of 

arthur miller fell. as the courts closed in 
on mrs. shipleys effectively unreviewable 
discretion,  the  state  department  granted 
previously-denied  passports  to  forestall 
legal  defeat.  finally  the  supreme  court 
issued  its  first  opinion  on  the  right  to 
international travel in 1958, declaring such 
travel  an  element  of  the  liberty  protected 
by the fifth amendment.  
a  signal  contribution  of  kahns  book  is 
his  thorough  examination  and  critique  of 
the constitutional basis for an individuals 
liberty to travel.  rather than travel primarily 
implicating 
the  fifth  amendments 
guarantee of due process, kahn argues that 
the right to travel internationally is simply 
and profoundly an attribute of citizenship.  
a citizen in a democracy, unlike a subject of 
a monarchy or a dictatorship, by definition 
travels  at  will,  on  self-determined  terms, 
for  self-defined  purposes,  without  being 
subject  to  approval  by  or  interference 
from  the  sovereign.  this  being  so,  kahn 
asserts,  the  citizenship  clause  of  the 
fourteenth  amendment  requires  that  us 
courts  strictly  scrutinize  watchlist-based 
actions  that  prohibit  travel.  citizens  need 
not  obtain  the  sovereigns  consent  to 
travel as long as the travelers actions are 
not  treasonous,  immediately  dangerous, 
or  contrary  to  some  lawful  obligation 
made to the state. the no-fly list, kahn 
maintains, fails strict scrutiny because it is 
not the least restrictive means of protecting 
civil aviation or national security. 
readers  may  not  all  accept  kahns 
argument that a retrospective look at travel 
restrictions imposed during the cold war 
provides a wholly apt perspective on travel 
prohibitions  imposed  in  the  context  of 
preclusive  counterterrorism.    regardless, 
kahn  makes  a  strong  case  for  how  us 
constitutional 
toward 
accommodating  both  fundamental  liberty 
of travel and our civil and human security.  

law  may  move 

74

journal on migration and human securitykahns analysis is speculative, but a court 
in  california  has  begun  to  pry  open  the 
doors of the tsc that houses the national 
security  watchlist.  in  january  2014  this 
court rendered a groundbreaking decision 
requiring  rectification  of  what  it  found 
to  be  an  unwarranted  prohibition  on  an 
individuals 
travel.  kahn 
testified as an expert at that trial, and his 
prescient book is a call to justice that stands 
as an essential guide to liberty of travel that 
will  challenge  courts  and  national  policy 
for some time to come.  

international 

75

journal on migration and human security