is border enforcement effective? 
what we know and what it means

edward alden  
council on foreign relations

executive summary
for  too  long,  the  policy  debate  over  border  enforcement  has  been  split 
between those who believe the border can be sealed against illegal entry 
by force alone, and those who believe that any effort to do so is futile and 
without expanded legal work opportunities. and for too long, both sides 
have been able to muster evidence to make their cases  the enforcers 
pointing to targeted successes at sealing the border, and the critics pointing 
to continued illegal entry despite the billions spent on enforcement. until 
recently  it  has  been  hard  to  referee  the  disputes  with  any  confidence 
because the data was simply inadequate  both sides could muster their 
preferred measures to make their case. but improvements in both data 
and analysis are increasingly making it possible to offer answers to the 
critical question of the effectiveness of border enforcement in stopping and 
deterring illegal entry. 
the  new  evidence  suggests  that  unauthorized  migration  across  the 
southern border has plummeted, with successful illegal entries falling from 
roughly 1.8 million in 2000 to just 200,000 by 2015. border enforcement 
has been a significant reason for the decline  in particular, the growing 
use of consequences such as jail time for illegal border crossers has had 
a powerful effect in deterring repeated border crossing efforts. the success 
of  deterrence  through  enforcement  has  meant  that  attempted  crossings 
have fallen dramatically even as the likelihood of a border crosser being 
apprehended by the border patrol has only risen slightly, to just over a 
50-50 chance. 
these  research  advances  should  help  to  inform  a  more  rational  public 
debate  over  the  incremental  benefits  of  additional  border  enforcement 
expenditures. with congress gearing up to consider budget proposals from 
the trump administration that seek an additional $2.6 billion for border 
security, including construction of new physical barriers, the debate is long 
overdue.  in  particular,  congress  should  be  taking  a  careful  look  at  the 
incremental  gains  that  might  come  from  additional  spending  on  border 
enforcement. the evidence suggests that deterrence through enforcement, 
despite its successes to date in reducing illegal entry across the border, is 
producing  diminishing  returns.  there  are  three  primary  reasons.  first, 
arrivals at the border are increasingly made up of asylum seekers from 
central america rather than traditional economic migrants from mexico; 

 2017 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 5 number 2 (2017): 481-490this is a population that is both harder to deter because of the dangers 
they face at home, and in many cases not appropriate to deter because the 
united states has legal obligations to consider serious requests for asylum. 
second, the majority of additions to the us unauthorized population is now 
arriving on legal visas and then overstaying; enforcement at the southern 
border  does  nothing  to  respond  to  this  challenge.  and  finally,  among 
mexican migrants, a growing percentage of the repeat border crossers are 
parents with children left behind in the united states, a population that is 
far harder to deter than young economic migrants.
the administration could better inform this debate by releasing to scholars 
and the public the research it has sponsored in order to give americans a 
fuller picture on border enforcement.

deterrence through enforcement
for most of its history, the united states had only limited controls over its land borders; 
the efforts over the past two decades or so to close the borders to unauthorized entry are 
a sharp departure. unauthorized migration from mexico began to rise sharply in the mid-
1960s following the elimination of the bracero program that had offered temporary work 
permits to mexican citizens, mostly for agricultural jobs. by the 1990s, with a huge bulge 
of young mexicans entering the labor market and mexicos economic growth too weak 
to absorb them, the number of illegal border crossers soared. the modern effort at border 
control can be dated quite precisely. it began on september 19, 1993, when the chief of 
the border patrol in el paso, silvestre reyes, decided he was fed up with using his agents 
to try to chase down unauthorized migrants after they had already crossed the border into 
texas. instead, he took 400 of his 650 agents and put them on 24-hour duty along the 
most heavily trafficked 20 miles of the sector, between the cities of el paso, texas and 
juarez, mexico. this operation blockade, which was later renamed operation hold the 
line, was immediately successful in reducing illegal entries in that corridor (alden 2008). 
the effort was enormously popular, and reyes went on to win a seat in congress in the 
1996 elections. his initiative was emulated the next year when operation gatekeeper was 
launched in southern california, in the corridor between tijuana, mexico and san diego, 
california, that had been a similarly large magnet for illegal crossers. both operations were 
seen as successful. in its first year, operation gatekeeper resulted in a 65 percent fall in 
illegal crossings along the five miles of the border from the pacific ocean inland; across 
the san diego region, illegal crossings fell to a 24-year low. similar declines were seen in 
el paso, texas (pearson 2000).1 
the  model  developed  along  the  border  in  texas  and  california  was  a  strategy  of 
deterrence  through  enforcement.  if  the  decision  by  a  migrant  to  attempt  to  enter  the 
united states illegally can be conceived as a rational calculation of costs and benefits, then 
the us strategy for deterring illegal migration since the mid-1990s has been based almost 
entirely on raising the expected costs of illegal migration through increased enforcement 
and penalties, rather than increasing the benefits by providing additional legal channels 

1   joseph nevins (2002) provided the definitive account of operation gatekeeper.

482

journal on migration and human securityfor migration or temporary work. president trumps proposal for a big beautiful wall 
covering the entire border is only the most extreme version of an enforcement strategy that 
has relied primarily on border security to reduce illegal migration to the united states.
for more than a decade after its launch in 1996, the evidence on the effectiveness of deterrence 
through  enforcement  was  mixed  at  best.  measured  by  the  number  of  apprehensions  or 
arrests at the border, it was quickly apparent that building fences and massing border patrol 
agents was a powerful deterrent to illegal crossing in the places where it was deployed. in 
the el paso sector, the decline in apprehensions was almost immediate following operation 
hold the line, falling from 250,000 in 1992 to fewer than 80,000 by 1994. in the san diego 
sector, apprehensions fell more gradually but still dramatically, from more than 550,000 in 
1992 to just 110,000 in 2001 (cbp 2016a). but it was also equally apparent that sealing the 
high-traffic corridors alone would not significantly reduce illegal crossings. instead, border 
crossers move to the more remote regions in arizona, and the numbers continued to climb, 
as did the number of migrant deaths in what became increasingly dangerous crossings. 
apprehensions along the entire border remained extremely high throughout the 1990s, and 
reached a record number  more than 1.6 million  in 2000.
many leading scholars have argued that border enforcement was destined to fail because 
the decision to migrate illegally was driven overwhelmingly by economic opportunity, and 
enforcement would never provide a sufficiently powerful deterrent (massey, durand, and 
malone 2003).2 and with us wage rates on average remaining three to four times as high 
as those in mexico, the potential wage gains for unauthorized migrants were, and remain, 
large. for much of the 1990s and early 2000s, this thesis seemed to be confirmed by the 
high level of illegal entry attempts despite a significant increase in border patrol agents, 
physical barriers such as fencing, and surveillance. border patrol leadership continued to 
argue throughout this period that enforcement was still a work in progress, and that with 
sufficient manpower and resources the early successes in california and texas could be 
replicated across the border. congress, not surprisingly, sided with the border patrol. the 
1996 illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act (iraira) authorized 
the hiring of an additional 1,000 border patrol agents annually to a cap of 10,000, as well 
as large new investments in surveillance capabilities. a second surge came in the mid-
2000s, when congress authorized another doubling of the size of the border patrol, and 
passed the 2006 secure fence act authorizing no less than 700 miles of reinforced fencing 
along the border. the department of homeland security (dhs) also invested heavily in 
surveillance technology to create a virtual fence along the border. today, the border 
patrol numbers are just under 20,000  with most of those along the border with mexico 
 and more than 650 miles of fencing has been constructed along the border, most of it 
in california and arizona. the secure fence act also laid out a border mission for the 
department of homeland security (dhs) that remains the law today  that the united 

2   more recently, massey, durand, and pren (2016) have argued that the evidence shows that the primary 
effect  of  border  enforcement  was  to  increase  the  number  of  settled  unauthorized  migrants,  because  they 
feared returning to mexico and being unable to re-enter the united states. 

483

is border enforcement effective? what we know and what it meansstates should achieve operational control of the border, defined as the prevention of all 
unlawful entries into the united states.3
while dhs remains far short of achieving that unrealistic goal, the last decade has provided 
evidence that the border patrol was more accurate in its predictions that enforcement would 
begin to reduce illegal entries significantly. apprehensions of illegal border crossers began 
to fall sharply in 2006, and have continued to decline, falling even more sharply in the early 
months of 2017 following the inauguration of president trump (partlow 2017). the cause of 
the decline was initially difficult to determine, because the steep drop off in apprehensions 
began  in  2007,  which  coincided  with  the  collapse  of  the  home  construction  market  (a 
large employer of unauthorized workers) and then with the spike in unemployment that 
followed the 2008 financial crisis. but with the strong recovery of the us economy since 
2009, coupled with a continued low level of apprehensions, the increased effectiveness 
of  border enforcement has  become more apparent. the united states has  now  had  the 
strongest sustained period of job creation in the post-world war ii era, unemployment has 
fallen well below five percent, and much of the job growth has been in lower-wage service 
and retail occupations that have historically attracted unauthorized immigrants. yet illegal 
border crossings remain much lower than they have been in decades. 
the decline in unauthorized border crossings is not entirely an enforcement story. some of 
the fall is explained by demographics  the number of young mexicans entering the labor 
market, the most likely cohort to attempt to migrate illegally, has been slowing, making it 
easier for them to find work at home even as growth in mexicos economy has remained 
weak. legal temporary work admissions have also been rising, especially under the h-2a 
program for agricultural workers, which was often ignored by farmers and growers when 
an undocumented labor force was readily available. the total number of h-2a visas issued 
to mexicans has roughly tripled from the level of the early 2000s, from fewer than 30,000 
annually to near 90,000, suggesting that more farmers and growers are using the legally 
available alternatives. but the decline in illegal entry has been far too large to be explained 
by these factors alone. 
the evidence of an enforcement impact is strengthened by research showing that many 
fewer mexicans are attempting to return after being deported or voluntarily returned to 
mexico,  suggesting  that  for  various  reasons,  they  are  being  deterred  from  attempting 
another crossing (roberts, forthcoming). recent research on illegal border crossings has 
improved our understanding of the role of deterrence. despite the enormous buildup in 
border patrol personnel, fencing, and surveillance capabilities over the past two decades, 
the likelihood of an illegal border crosser being apprehended has risen only slightly. the 
border patrol faces an adaptive adversary, the smugglers, who try to keep the likelihood 
of arrest from rising through their own investments in personnel (spotters, foot guides), 
technology (night vision goggles, drones), and tactics (new crossing routes). but this raises 
smugglers  costs  and  thus  the  fees  that  they  charge  their  clients,  which  rose  from  less 
than $1,000 in 2000 to $3,000 or more in recent years. the border patrol also began to 

3   secure fence act of 2006, pub. l. no. 109-367, 120 stat. 2705. that exact language was replicated in 
president trumps january 25, 2017 executive order on border security, in which operational control was 
defined as stopping all illegal entries. see border security and immigration enforcement improvements, 
exec. order no. 13767, 82 fed. reg. 8793 (jan. 25, 2017).

484

journal on migration and human securityimpose consequences on those caught attempting illegal entry in the late 2000s, ranging 
from formal removal to prosecution and jail time. rising smuggling costs and intensifying 
consequences have increased deterrence, both for those contemplating going to the border 
in  the  first  place,  and  those  caught  attempting  illegal  entry  after  going  to  the  border. 
deterrence through enforcement appears to have been a significant factor in reducing the 
number of unauthorized border crossings. 

measuring success
our understanding of the role of border enforcement in reducing illegal entry has been 
greatly enhanced by recent improvements in the measurement of illegal border crossings. 
since 1925 following the creation of the border patrol, the primary measure for the security 
of the border against unauthorized entry has been the annual number of apprehensions. 
apprehensions are simply a measure of the number of arrests made in the border region 
of those attempting illegal entry; for the past two decades, the border patrol has kept good 
records of multiple (or recidivist) apprehensions, which show that up until recently many 
border crossers had tried to cross multiple times in a single year. the annual number of 
apprehensions rose more or less steadily from the end of the bracero program in 1964, 
reaching peaks of just over 1.6 million in 1986 (right before the passage of the immigration 
control and reform act, which legalized many unauthorized migrants in the united states) 
and  then  a  record  of  1.65  million  in  2000.  from  1974  to  2010,  the  annual  number  of 
apprehensions at the us-mexico border never fell below 500,000. despite its long lineage, 
however, the apprehensions measure has always been an inadequate one for understanding 
the utility of border enforcement in preventing illegal entries. apprehensions are a poor 
measure of success. a falling number of apprehensions could equally indicate successful 
border enforcement (rising deterrence and fewer attempts) or failed border enforcement 
(a lower apprehension rate and more successful illegal entries). and the apprehensions 
number is of little value in determining which enforcement measures have been more or 
less successful at discouraging illegal entry.
recent studies have begun, however, to disaggregate the various components of border 
enforcement, and make it possible to arrive at more robust conclusions on effectiveness. as 
roberts, alden, and whitley (2013) argued, the goal of border enforcement is to reduce the 
number of successful illegal entries; therefore, the core strategic measure of enforcement 
success is the total number of illegal entries. but determining successful entries is much 
harder than simply counting arrests. it requires making credible estimates of the number of 
persons who succeeded in crossing the border and entering the united states without being 
apprehended, or in many cases even directly observed, by the border patrol. in order to 
determine that measure, the us government needs robust estimates on both the likelihood 
that  an  unauthorized  border  crosser  will  be  stopped  and  detained  (the  probability  of 
apprehension) and the likelihood that border crossers will be deterred from attempting 
entry or reentry after being apprehended and returned to mexico. while the border patrol 
keeps  accurate  records  of  recidivist  apprehensions    those  arrested  multiple  times 
 determining whether an individual has evaded the border patrol entirely and entered 
successfully, or was deterred from making additional entry attempts, poses much larger 
methodological  challenges.  in  2015,  dhs  contracted  with  a  research  organization,  the 

485

is border enforcement effective? what we know and what it meansinstitute for defense analyses (ida), to produce the first serious estimates of successful 
illegal entries between the ports on the us-mexico border, as well as at the port of entry and 
in the maritime environment (ida 2016). the estimates were presented to the department 
leadership in early 2016, but were never released to the public or to the congress. a copy 
of the study leaked later that year, however, producing several news stories, and was posted 
on the internet (spagat 2016).
the findings were striking. first, the research found that the total number of successful 
illegal  entries  across  the  southern  border  has  fallen  much  more  dramatically  than  the 
apprehensions data suggest  from close to 1.8 million in fy 2000 to fewer than 200,000 
by fy 2015. second, the primary cause of that sharp drop was not that a significantly 
higher  percentage  of  border  crossers  was  being  apprehended  by  the  border  patrol,  but 
rather that they were being deterred from trying in the first place, or from trying again 
after being arrested and returned the first time. the deterrence rate has risen from just 10 
percent in the early 2000s  meaning that 90 percent of those returned across the border 
would try again  to roughly 60 percent by 2015. third, this success was achieved despite 
the border patrol falling far short of the 100 percent apprehension rate that has been sought 
by the congress since the passage of the secure fence act. the likelihood of arrest on any 
particular border crossing has increased, but not by a lot  in 2000, the odds of getting 
caught were roughly 40 percent, and by 2015 it had risen to a little over 55 percent. and 
yet the total number of crossings has plummeted.
deterrence  appears  to  have  increased  considerably  after  2011,  when  the  united  states 
began imposing consequences on nearly all apprehended migrants. historically, most 
border crossers were voluntarily returned to mexico, and the evidence shows that most 
simply kept trying until they were successful in entering the united states. but beginning 
gradually in the mid-2000s, and more comprehensively in 2011 with the launch of the 
consequence delivery system, more and more border crossers have faced some sort 
of more severe penalty  from jail time to removal to the interior of mexico to formal 
deportation.4 criminal prosecutions, especially felony prosecutions, appear to have had a 
powerful deterrent impact in discouraging apprehended border crossers from making future 
efforts. a migration policy institute (mpi) survey of repatriated mexican nationals showed 
a sharp increase in the number saying they would remain in mexico rather than attempting 
to return to the united states. as recently as 2010, some 95 percent of all returnees said 
they would seek reentry, but by 2015 only 49 percent said they would try again (schultheis 
and ruiz soto 2017). rising smuggling costs  a consequence of tougher enforcement 
that has required smugglers to use more difficult and dangerous entry corridors  also 
appear to be acting as a strong deterrent. the mpi study reported that average smuggling 
costs for an individual had risen from $1,500 in 2010 to $4,100 by 2015 (ibid., 1).
this research has marked a huge advance over the traditional apprehensions measure, and 
over the border patrols own known flow estimates, which rely on physical observations 
of border crossers. the ida work, in particular, provided the first compelling evidence 
that enforcement  and not just demographic and economic factors  has played a big 
role in the reduction of illegal entries, and the research has isolated the importance of the 
consequences programs in deterring reentry. for the first time since the border build-up 

4   for an analysis of the consequence delivery system, see capps, hipsman. and meissner (2017).

486

journal on migration and human securitybegan more than two decades ago, there is some solid evidence on what works and what 
does not in border enforcement.

conclusions and policy implications
the  border  enforcement  buildup,  coupled  with  harsher  consequences  for  unauthorized 
border  crossers,  has  played  some  significant  role  in  reducing  illegal  entries  across  the 
southern border with mexico. this might seem to lead logically to the conclusion that 
still more enforcement and even harsher consequences would be still more effective. this 
is indeed very much the approach the trump administration is taking. there is a danger, 
however, in drawing such simplistic conclusions from the research.
there are at least three reasons to think more deeply about the policy implications of these 
findings. the first is the changing nature of the border-crossing population. the decline in 
traditional mexican border crossers coming to the united states for better jobs has been 
accompanied by a rise in central americans  mostly from el salvador, guatemala, and 
honduras  arriving at the border to request asylum protection. over the past several 
years, apprehensions of non-mexicans at the border, mostly from central america, have 
met or exceeded apprehensions of mexicans. the number of asylum requests from those 
arriving at the border has also soared in recent years, from just 22,000 in 2011 to 140,000 
by 2015. arrests of unaccompanied minors and family units have fluctuated, hitting nearly 
140,000 in fy 2014, falling to 80,000 in fy 2015, and rising again to nearly 140,000 in fy 
2016, but they have been consistently far higher than they were a decade ago (cbp 2016b). 
this population is a very different population from the traditional mexican border crossers; 
while some may be coming solely for economic opportunity, many are fleeing violence 
or the threat of violence. the question of whether such individuals can be, or should be, 
deterred is a very different question.
given the dangers that asylum seekers face back home, this is a harder population to deter, 
one that is willing to run higher risks than would traditional economic migrants. the united 
states has used a variety of means to deter asylum seekers from central america, including 
working with mexico to bolster enforcement at its southern border to prevent transit, the 
use of expedited removal to reject asylum seekers at the border, and detention during the 
application proceedings for those who are permitted to make their case in court. the trump 
administration appears determined to double-down on these deterrence efforts. the recent 
white house executive orders, as interpreted by dhs, call for a range of deterrence-oriented 
measures, including: tightening credible fear determinations so that more asylum seekers 
are turned back at the border; increasing detention of asylum applicants; and sanctioning 
parents  who  pay  smugglers  to  bring  their  children  to  the  united  states  (kelly  2017). 
while it is too early to draw any firm conclusions, it is possible that these threats have 
contributed to the decline in asylum applications at the border in the first half of 2017. 
apart from the question of effectiveness, however, the policy issues raised by deterring 
asylum seekers are quite different from those involved in deterring economic migrants. 
even those sympathetic to economic migrants seeking better jobs and opportunities in the 
united states would acknowledge that the law forbids them from entering and working 
illegally. but migrants have clear rights not to be returned where their life or freedom 

487

is border enforcement effective? what we know and what it meanswould be threatened on account of race, religion, nationality, or membership of a particular 
social group or political opinion, and to seek asylum, which requires showing of a well-
founded fear of persecution on one of these grounds.. those standards, based on united 
nations conventions and protocols, are incorporated into us law. using enforcement tools 
to deter potential asylum seekers thus calls into question us compliance not only with its 
international obligations, but with its own laws. congress should be vigorously debating 
how far it is willing to go down the path of deterring even legitimate asylum seekers.5
secondly, along the same lines, deterrence works best where the stakes for the individual 
migrants are the lowest. those most likely to be deterred are those with the weakest ties 
to the united states. in the mpi survey of repatriated mexicans, for example, nearly two-
thirds of those who had been deported and left minor children behind in the united states 
said they would try again to cross the border, far higher than the numbers for those without 
children (schultheis and ruiz soto 2017). again, while it may be possible to deter some 
of those deported parents, they are clearly willing to run much higher risks to enter again 
than would a border crosser whose primary motivation is economic opportunity. and the 
moral judgments involved in splitting up families in the name of enforcement are quite 
different  from  using  deterrent  measures  to  discourage  young  job  seekers  from  coming 
to the united states. the current consequences regime is set up to impose harsher and 
harsher penalties on repeated border crossers if they are apprehended, in effect reserving 
the harshest punishments for those unauthorized migrants whose family ties to the united 
states are strongest. again, congress should be debating whether this was the intention 
behind tighter border enforcement.
finally, further increasing border enforcement would seem to be a case of fighting the 
last war. as recent research by robert warren and donald kerwin (2017) has shown, the 
mexican border has ceased to be the route of choice for those seeking to enter the united 
states and remain illegally. increasingly, the easiest path into the country has been to arrive 
on a legal visa and then simply remain after the period of admission has expired. visa 
overstays have long been a big percentage of the undocumented population  about 42 
percent currently according to the warren and kerwin research. but they are a rising share 
of the newly arrived undocumented. in 2014, the latest data available, two-thirds of those 
added to the undocumented population in the united states were visa overstays. despite 
more than two decades of pressure from the congress, however, administrations have made 
only modest advances in discouraging visa overstays. even simple and obvious measures 
 like email notifications to visa holders present in the united states warning them of 
the  consequences  of  overstaying    have  not  been  taken  (alden  and  schwartz  2012). 
and enforcement actions targeted specifically at visa overstayers are rare. the potential 
enforcement gains from deterring overstays would appear to be far larger  and likely far 
less costly  than a further buildup along the border. 
the latest research, in other words, would suggest that the united states is reaching the 
point  of  diminishing  returns  on  border  enforcement.  further  border  enforcement  may 
do a bit more to discourage illegal entry, but it will overlook the biggest path for illegal 
migration (visa overstays), and require harsh targeting of the most vulnerable populations 

5   for a fuller discussion of the limitations of deterrence with respect to refugees and asylum seekers, see 
gammeltoft-hansen and tan (2017). 

488

journal on migration and human security(asylum seekers) and the most motivated ones (parents with children in the united states). 
congress should be vigorously debating whether this is what it intended when it launched 
the border buildup more than two decades ago. 
finally, the public debate over border enforcement would be greatly enhanced by the release 
of research and data that dhs continues to hold in-house. while the research advances of the 
past couple of years are important, they have not been broadly shared either with the public 
or with the expert community. the potential is there for still further advances if researchers 
can get full access to dhs data, and can build on the excellent work done by the ida team. 
congress has long been demanding the development and release of such measures. most 
recently, the national defense authorization act of 2017,6 passed in january 2017, calls 
for the administration to develop metrics . . . to measure the effectiveness of security 
between ports of entry, at ports of entry, and in the maritime domain. it specifies that the 
measures should include the apprehension rate and the estimated number of illegal entries. 
the time for a fact-driven debate on the cost-effectiveness of border enforcement  and 
the most sensible policy responses  is long overdue.
 

references

alden, edward. 2008. the closing of the american border: terrorism, immigration and 

security since 9/11. new york: harper collins. 

alden, edward, and liam schwartz. 2012. faster, safer and smarter: a modern visa 
system for the united states. new york: council on foreign relations. https://
www.cfr.org/report/faster-safer-and-smarter-modern-visa-system-united-states.

capps, randy, faye hipsman, and doris meissner. 2017. advances in u.s.-mexico border 
enforcement: a review of the consequence delivery system. washington, dc: 
migration policy institute. http://www.migrationpolicy.org/research/advances-us-
mexico-border-enforcement-review-consequence-delivery-system. 

cbp (us customs and border protection). 2016a. united states border patrol, southwest 
border sectors: total illegal alien apprehensions by fiscal year. washington, dc: 
cbp.  https://www.cbp.gov/sites/default/files/assets/documents/2016-oct/bp%20
southwest%20border%20sector%20apps%20fy1960%20-%20fy2016.pdf. 

. 2016b. united states border patrol, southwest border sectors: family unit and 
unaccompanied alien children (0-17) apprehensions fy 16, compared to the 
same time period for fy 15 and fy 14. washington, dc: cbp. https://www.
cbp.gov/sites/default/files/assets/documents/2016-oct/bp%20southwest%20
border%20family%20units%20and%20uac%20apps%20-%20fy16.pdf.

gammeltoft-hansen,  thomas,  and  nikolas  f.  tan.  2017.  the  end  of  the  deterrence 
paradigm? future directions for global refugee policy. journal on migration 
and human security 5(1): 28-56. https://doi.org/10.14240/jmhs.v5i1.73. 

6   national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2017, s. 2943, 114th cong. 

489

is border enforcement effective? what we know and what it meansida  (institute  for  defense  analyses).  2016.  assessing  southern  border  security.  not 

publicly released.

kelly,  john.  2017.  implementing  the  presidents  border  security  and  immigration 
enforcement  improvements  policies.  policy  memorandum.  washington, 
dc:  dhs.  https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/17_0220_s1_
implementing-the-presidents-border-security-immigration-enforcement-
improvement-policies.pdf.

massey, douglas s., jorge durand and nolan j. malone. 2003. beyond smoke and mirrors: 
mexican immigration in an era of economic integration. new york: russell sage 
foundation. 

massey, douglas s., jorge durand, and karen a. pren. 2016. why border enforcement 
backfired.  american  journal  of  sociology  121(5):  1557-1600.  https://doi.
org/10.1086/684200. 

nevins,  joseph.  2002.  operation  gatekeeper:  the  rise  of  the  illegal  alien  and  the 

making of the u.s.-mexico boundary. new york and london: routledge.

partlow,  joshua.  2017.  trump  effect  slows  illegal  crossings.  but  for  how  long? 

washington post, may 23.

pearson,  michael  a.  2000.  testimony  of  michael  a.  pearlson,  executive  associate 
commissioner  for  field  operations,  immigration  and  naturalization  service 
before the subcommitee on immigration of the senate judiciary. https://www.
uscis.gov/sites/default/files/files/pressrelease/pearson.pdf. 

roberts, bryan, edward alden, and john whitley. 2013. managing illegal immigration to 
the united states: how effective is enforcement? new york: council on foreign 
relations.

roberts,  bryan  w.  forthcoming.  illegal  immigration  outcomes  on  the  u.s.  southern 

border: what they are and why they have changed. cato journal. 

schultheis, ryan, and ariel g. ruiz soto. 2017. a revolving door no more? a statistical 
profile of mexican adults repatriated from the united states. washington, dc: 
migration  policy  institute.  http://www.migrationpolicy.org/research/revolving-
door-no-more-statistical-profile-mexican-adults-repatriated-united-states.

spagat,  elliott.  2016.  barely  half  of  illegal  border  crossers  caught.  associated 
press,  october  7.  https://apnews.com/3ac60b8a76594caeb784145c8a6786d3/
apnewsbreak-barely-half-illegal-border-crossers-caught. 

warren, robert, and donald kerwin. 2017. the 2,000 mile wall in search of a purpose: 
since 2007 visa overstays have outnumbers undocumented border crossers by 
a half million. journal of migration and human security 5(1): 1-8. https://doi.
org/10.14240/jmhs.v5i1.77. 

490

journal on migration and human security