enforcement, integration, and the 
future of immigration federalism

cristina rodriguez  
yale law school

executive summary
the  federal  government  has  a  monopoly  over  the  terms  of  immigration 
law, and it superintends the nations singular immigration enforcement 
bureaucracy. but our federalism nonetheless provides a vital playing field 
for sharp debates over the status of immigrants in american life. the forms 
of state and local involvement in immigration policy are varied, but they fall 
into two basic categories of mutually dependent and re-enforcing policies: 
enforcement federalism and integration federalism. whereas enforcement 
federalism concerns the extent to which localities should assist or resist 
federal  removal  policies,  integration  federalism  encompasses  measures 
designed  to  assist  immigrants,  regardless  of  status,  to  plant  roots  and 
acculturate to life in the united states. 
both forms of immigration federalism take shape through a wide variety 
of intergovernmental relations, not only between the federal government 
on the one hand and states and localities on the other, but also between 
states and the cities within them  an increasingly important dimension 
of  immigration  federalism  today.  these  relations  have  important  legal 
characteristics, and constitutional and statutory law bring them into being 
and mediate them. but the nature of any given intergovernmental dynamic 
will be shaped just as much by a combination of ideology and institutional 
imperatives. these elements can either unite the center and the periphery 
in common cause or produce the sort of conflict that has made immigration 
federalism a high-profile issue for decades.
given  the  density  of  the  intergovernmental  dynamics  that  shape  the 
countrys  immigration  policy,  developing  a  comprehensive  strategy  for 
immigration federalism requires more than a predilection toward or away 
from centralization of government authority. it requires a clear view on 
the appropriate metes and bounds of immigration enforcement, as well as 
a set of beliefs about the proper place in the social order of immigrants 
with different legal statuses. while this essay remains largely (though not 
entirely) agnostic on these questions, it offers four basic principles to frame 
any future federalism agenda.
first, when it comes to enforcement federalism, the federal government 
ought  to  acknowledge  the  reasons  that  localities  might  resist  federal 
enforcement efforts, at least as a matter of politics, and if only to ensure that 

 2017 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 5 number 2 (2017): 509-540federal policy is subjected to accountability checks by competing, external 
pressures.  second,  whatever  the  value  of  resistance  to  enforcement,  a 
federalism  agenda  should  include  efforts  by  all  levels  of  government  to 
identify a manageable equilibrium that reconciles the federal governments 
constitutional and statutory responsibilities for maintaining an enforcement 
regime  with  the  local  politics  of  immigration  and  the  lived  realities  of 
immigrant communities. third, when it comes to integration federalism, 
the problem of illegal immigration must be solved, and only the federal 
government can do so decisively. federalism can only mediate the political 
conflict over status and help set the terms for its ultimate resolution. and 
yet, the structural reasons that have given rise to integration federalism 
should re-enforce the countrys commitment to locally driven integration 
policy, supported by a national-level commitment to information sharing, 
coordination, and resource support. finally, because both enforcement and 
integration policy require systemic flexibility, it is important not to confuse 
arguments on the merits of immigration policy with structural claims. in 
other words, scholars, advocates, or policymakers should exercise humility 
and  circumspection  when  developing  conversation-stopping  claims  that 
a  certain  intergovernmental  relation  is  required  by  law,  especially  in  a 
context as charged as immigration policy. 

introduction
conventional wisdom has it that immigration law is an exclusive federal domain governed 
by uniform rules and policies. and yet, american federalism has meant that states and 
localities have helped shape immigration policy throughout history, often through deliberate 
resistance  to  the  federal  government.  during  the  obama  years,  the arizona  model  of 
federalism drew the spotlight, as the state legislature and other like-minded jurisdictions 
enacted sweeping immigration enforcement measures with great fanfare, in part to rebuke 
the more tempered federal policy of the day. in a highly unusual response, the obama 
administration sued the states, and the supreme court eventually vindicated the federal 
governments  exclusive  authority  to  set  enforcement  priorities.1  today,  the  preeminent 
intergovernmental  script  has  flipped  to  what  we  might  call  the  california  model.  pro-
immigration states and localities are directly challenging a presidential administration bent 
on ever-tougher enforcement justified with alarmist rhetoric about immigrations dangers. 
but even as resistant localities force the federal government to defend its policies in court, 
the trump administration finds itself buttressed by yet a third model, according to which 
states like texas and north carolina enact legislation to disable their own pro-immigration 
cities from resisting federal enforcement. immigration federalism is in constant flux. 
though  these  high-profile  contretemps  keep  immigration  federalism  a  part  of  public 
discourse, state and local governments long have been de facto immigration policymakers 
in myriad and more mundane ways. the complexity of intergovernmental relations in our 
federalist  system  sets  a  crucial  framework  for  immigration  policymaking.  though  the 
immigration and nationality act (ina) and related statutes span hundreds of pages in the 

1   arizona v. united states, 567 u.s. __, 132 s.ct. 2492 (2012).

510

journal on migration and human securityus code, the secular expansion of the federal immigration machinery over the last century 
has not displaced immigration federalism, for one simple reason common to many spheres 
of regulation. immigrant settlement and immigration enforcement are fundamentally spatial 
and territorial, thus implicating the politics and bureaucracies of our federal system. our 
national immigration policy is, in fact, debated and set through various intergovernmental 
relationships  mostly between the federal government and cities and counties, but also 
between the federal government and states, between states and the cities within them, and 
by each of these jurisdictions acting autonomously.2
at any given time, immigration federalism simultaneously re-enforces and resists federal 
policy, and the political valence of immigration is often in flux. the ideological diversity in 
government that federalism produces ensures this state of tension, as does the fact that the 
institutional interests of federal and local actors do not always align, regardless of partisan 
affiliation.  for  example,  even  as  the  current  department  of  homeland  security  (dhs) 
finds itself in conflict with certain state and local officials who seek to provide immigrants 
with  sanctuary,3  the  administration  and  allies  in  congress  aspire  to  recruit  still  other 
local officials in an affirmative push to amplify federal enforcement efforts. republicans in 
charge of the federal government have not given on up on federalism  they simply want 
it to serve their ends. 
to understand the metes and bounds of immigration federalism, it will be useful to break the 
concept down into two categories: enforcement federalism and integration federalism. the 
legal, institutional, and political conditions governing each variant of federalism differ. the 
former entails the local relationship to federal removal policy and its many tools of coercion, 
and it is dominated by debates over legal authority and intergovernmental relations. the 
latter implicates affirmative strategies to either promote or prevent immigrant incorporation 
into the body politic and may have little if anything to do with federal policy, which is 
itself limited in scope and ambition. though legal questions arise, integration primarily 
raises questions of political will and bureaucratic capacity, and states and localities long 
have taken the lead in devising our nations affirmative integration agenda. and so even 
as we might seek to control or temper local involvement in immigration enforcement, any 
integration agenda ought to have states and localities at its center.
on some level, this enforcement-integration dichotomy is too stark. enforcement policy 
heavily affects immigrants prospects for integration. enforcement policy  is integration 
policy. enforcement federalism encompasses local refusal to assist federal enforcement 
in order to protect immigrants in the community, as well as federal-state cooperation to 
deport  immigrants,  or  otherwise  create  incentives  for  immigrants  to  leave.  in  addition, 
affirmative integration policies, or the lack thereof, can influence immigrant movement, 
either attracting immigrants to welcoming jurisdictions, or driving them away by creating 
inhospitable  climates  for  settlement. whether  a  locality  creates  a  receptive  climate  for 

2   for ease of exposition, when invoking states and county and local governments at once, i use the terms 
localities and local jurisdictions. but where it makes a material difference to the analysis to refer to states 
versus cities, i use these more specific terms. 
3   as discussed in more detail below, the term sanctuary is an evocative yet somewhat misleading label for 
a set of policies that really ought to go by the more pedestrian term noncooperation, because they limit the 
extent to which local police and other officials assist federal immigration enforcement efforts.

511

enforcement, integration, and the future of immigration federalismintegration can help shape the size and nature of the enforcement domain in any given 
local setting. but as with any overly reductive dichotomy, this one can help us organize the 
debate over the state and local role in immigration.4 
the intergovernmental dynamics and politics that shape immigration federalism are certainly 
governed by ongoing debates concerning legal authority. the extent to which localities can 
establish immigration priorities that diverge from federal policy, and the scope of federal 
authority to reign localities in, set the ground rules for intergovernmentalism. but even if 
these legal lines were crystal clear, defining an actual agenda for immigration federalism 
requires answering far more contested questions. should our default assumption be that 
immigration ought to be controlled? or, should our animating objective be that immigrant 
communities be allowed to flourish? when and how do these objectives conflict? 
in this paper, i remain largely agnostic on these policy questions, focusing instead on how 
federalism provides a framework for answering them. but this framework ultimately points 
to four very basic goals for a federalism strategy. first, when it comes to enforcement 
federalism, it will be important to acknowledge the reasons for local resistance to federal 
enforcement, at least as a matter of politics, and if only to ensure that federal policy is 
subject  to  checks  by  competing,  external  pressures.  second,  the  value  of  resistance 
to  enforcement  notwithstanding,  a  federalism  agenda  should  include  efforts  to  identify 
a  manageable  equilibrium  that  reconciles  the  federal  governments  constitutional  and 
statutory  responsibilities  for  maintaining  an  enforcement  regime  with  the  local  politics 
of immigration and the lived realities of immigrant communities. third, when it comes to 
integration federalism, the structural reasons that have given rise to it should re-enforce a 
commitment to locally driven integration policy, supported by a national-level commitment 
to information sharing, coordination, and resource support. finally, to preserve the systemic 
flexibility that immigration policy requires, scholars, advocates, and policymakers should 
be circumspect about launching hard-edged legal claims concerning the scope of power 
held by any one level of government, mindful that structural doctrines that advance ones 
preferred policy objectives in one context might do the opposite in another.
to develop these conclusions, i explore three sets of issues. i begin with and devote the bulk 
of the discussion to enforcement federalism  the most legally and politically contested 
domain of immigration federalism with the sharpest intergovernmental conflict. i establish 
the legal parameters of enforcement federalism and identify the institutional considerations 
that should inform any strategic thinking about federalisms future. i then briefly explore 
the role that federalism plays in immigrant integration. finally, though the federal-local 
relationship  has  dominated  immigration  federalism,  that  should  change.  the  future  of 
immigration federalism is likely to be shaped significantly by another intergovernmental 
dynamic    the  state-local  relationship.  i  thus  conclude  by  highlighting  how  tensions 
between states and their localities reflect and define the national debate over immigration. 

4    the  dichotomy  is  useful  as  a  way  of  separating  those  policies  that  are  specifically  concerned  with 
intergovernmental relations between washington and the periphery (enforcement federalism) and those that 
arise largely through autonomous state action (immigrant integration), even as they might present preemption 
concerns or involve coordination with federal actors through grant programs and the like.

512

journal on migration and human securityi. enforcement federalism: a tale of legal and political 
flux
formally  speaking,  immigration  enforcement  constitutes  an  exclusive  federal  domain. 
in  contrast  to  the  criminal  justice  system,  states  and  localities  do  not  operate  parallel 
immigration laws, police, prosecutors, and judges. congress defines the exclusive grounds 
for  entry  and  removal,  and  the  executive  branch  enforces  those  provisions  through  an 
extensive federal bureaucracy. 
but federalism helps shape immigration enforcement policy for two primary reasons. first, 
criminal convictions under state law constitute many of the grounds of removal set out in 
the us code. accordingly, state criminal justice systems feed the immigration bureaucracy 
(motomura 2011). second, though the federal enforcement bureaucracy is vast, it has certain 
crucial limitations. it consists of few beat cops who interact on a regular basis with the 
regulated immigrant community, and its investigative resources tend to be used for large 
operations rather than ordinary policing. to identify, apprehend, and remove noncitizens, 
dhs depends on the local, county, and state police and corrections officials who come into 
contact with noncitizens through arrests and other means. our immigration enforcement 
regime is thus best characterized as vertically integrated, even though immigration law 
itself is defined exclusively at the federal level (rodriguez 2012).
enforcement federalism, as i define it, is thus expressly about intergovernmental relations 
between the periphery and the center. the character and extent of the systems integration 
has been in flux in recent years. the system is never fully coherent at any moment in time, 
because federalisms many agents inevitably create intergovernmental friction and pockets 
of  tension  between  washington  and  the  local.  federalism  actually  consists  of  myriad 
intergovernmental relations rather than a singular federal-local dynamic. ideological and 
partisan considerations, as well as institutional factors, shape these many relations. 
ideologically speaking, the mayors and police of large, immigrant-heavy cities such as 
new york are more likely to end up in conflict with a republican executive than with a 
democratic one. pro-enforcement states such as arizona are more likely to challenge or 
resist the enforcement policy of a federal government in democratic hands and embrace 
or re-enforce the policies of a republican executive. but the logistics of federalism can 
also transcend or stymie these partisan alignments. the institutional interests of the center 
and periphery sometimes diverge, regardless of partisan alignment. even as it sought to 
advance pro-immigration politics, for example, the obama administration maintained a 
robust enforcement and removals agenda, precipitating local resistance from democratic 
governors  and  mayors  that  complicated  (but  did  not  necessarily  undermine)  dhs 
enforcement. in addition, despite efforts by the obama-era dhs to centralize enforcement 
policy, it could not eschew reliance on state and local cooperation altogether. 
because of this intergovernmental complexity, enforcement will entail a mix of centralization 
and diffusion, regardless of the ideology or party in charge of the federal government. 
indeed, it would be difficult to identify an optimal level of centralization for enforcement 
policy in any objective sense. instead, the extent of federal control is always likely to be 
contested and contingent. 

513

enforcement, integration, and the future of immigration federalismthe range of intergovernmental possibilities for enforcement policy can be conceptualized 
through  a  simple  two-by-two  matrix.  the  x-axis  describes  the  orientation  of  local 
jurisdictions  to  the  federal  government,  with  the  strategies  of  resistance  to  federal 
priorities  on  the  one  hand  and  cooperation  with  federal  priorities  on  the  other. the 
y-axis describes the inclinations of local jurisdictions toward immigration enforcement, 
with enforcement skepticism on the one hand and zealous enforcement on the other. 
                                     resistance to                       cooperation with 
                                    federal priorities                  federal priorities

t
n
e
m
e
c
r
o
f
n
e
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

m
s
i
c
i
t
p
e
k
s

 
s
u
o
l
a
e
z

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
t
n
e
m
e
c
r
o
f
n
e

each of the combinations thus identified reflects both ideological positions on immigration 
policy  and  power  relationships  between  the  periphery  and  the  center.  different  legal 
parameters and policy possibilities define each type of enforcement federalism, and each 
should be considered in turn. in so doing, it remains important to keep in mind that resistance 
and  cooperation  dynamics  will  operate  under  any  given  presidential  administration, 
even as the locations of resistance and cooperation change. but because of institutional 
considerations, tensions can arise between the periphery and the center, even when they are 
ideologically aligned. to varying degrees, the federal government will use the legal tools at 
its disposal to bring local jurisdictions in line with its own policy preferences. 
to see how these combinations might play out, i first examine how a pro-enforcement 
agenda at the local level might inform the federalism dynamic and then consider how local 
enforcement skepticism might take shape.

a. the pro-enforcement agenda

a pro-enforcement agenda at the local level can take a number of forms and be advanced 
by a range of actors, including state lawmakers, governors, mayors, and police chiefs. in 
the last decade, the pro-enforcement agenda has found its highest profile in state laws and 
local ordinances that would directly regulate employers, landlords, and even immigrants 
themselves, in service of eliminating unauthorized immigration and often as a rebuke to 
perceived federal under-enforcement. but the local pro-enforcement agenda can also be 
enacted through the day-to-day decisions of state, county, and local police departments 
working to accommodate federal enforcement requests.
regardless of their orientation toward the federal government, enforcement enthusiasts 

514

journal on migration and human securityoften employ rule of law rhetoric, defining unauthorized immigrants in particular as law 
breakers or public safety risks. this pursuit of enforcement might reflect recognition by 
local officials of the basic legitimacy of an immigration enforcement regime, which would 
make enforcement cooperation a matter of systemic integrity. but as some commentators 
have  argued,  the  pro-enforcement  agenda  is  also  animated  in  some  quarters  by  more 
populist and even malign motivations, such as resistance to the cultural change and racial 
diversity  that  immigration  produces  (gulasekaram  and  ramakrishnan  2013,  2130-36; 
guttentag 2013). 
federal local-conflict. once the exemplar of immigration federalism, arizonas senate 
bill 1070 (sb 1070)  the support our law enforcement and safe neighborhoods act 
 embodied a staunch local enforcement mentality cum critique of federal enforcement 
policy.5 it created state-level penalties for violations of certain immigration laws, sanctioned 
unauthorized workers directly, and directed local police to inquire into immigration status.6 
signed by a republican governor during the obama administration, the law crystallized a 
partisan split on immigration policy writ large, with republicans at the local level calling 
for maximal enforcement in the face of a democratic white house that sought legislative 
legalization and priorities-driven enforcement. sb 1070 represented a kind of culmination 
of  widespread  disquiet  with  the  extent  of  federal  enforcement.7  similar  laws  had  been 
percolating  around  republican  statehouses  and  local  city  councils  since  at  least  2006, 
drafted, sponsored, and advanced by networks of restrictionists and policy entrepreneurs 
who sought to push their agenda throughout the country. this timing complicates a strictly 
partisan story of immigration federalism, because it reflects the local, republican divergence 
from even bush-era enforcement policy.8 but with sb 1070, arizona refined the attrition 
through enforcement narrative, using the obama administration as its perfect foil.
in  2012,  the  obama  administration  answered arizonas  challenge  in  an  unprecedented 
manner by filing a preemption lawsuit against arizona and other states that had enacted 
5   ariz. s.b. 1070, 49th leg., 2d reg. sess. (2010). 
6   californias proposition 187, enacted by voters in 1994, might also fit into this category, though it differs 
in important respects from sb 1070-style laws in ways that reflect how immigration federalism has evolved 
in the federal governments shadow. proposition 187 sought to deny unauthorized immigrants a range of 
state and local services, including public schooling, but it did not purport to enlist local officials in direct 
immigration enforcement or create parallel immigration offenses to mirror federal law. the immigration 
restrictionism it embodied was also of a piece with the rise of anti-immigrant sentiment among the newly 
ascendant congressional republicans of that era. 
7   sb 1070 itself begins with a statement of intent declaring the states compelling interest in the cooperative 
enforcement  of  federal  immigration  laws,  as  well  as  its  intent  to  make  attrition  through  enforcement 
the public policy of all state and local agencies in arizona. the provisions of the act were intended to 
work together to discourage and deter the unlawful entry and presence of aliens and economic activity by 
persons  unlawfully  present  in  the  united  states  (ariz.  s.b.  1070,  49th  leg.,  2d  reg.  sess.  (2010)).  in 
public statements, lawmakers expressly called out the federal governments failure to enforce the ina as 
justification for their own laws. after signing sb 1070, for example, governor jan brewer declared that it 
represents another tool for our state to use as we work to solve a crisis we did not create and the federal 
government has refused to fix (archibold 2010).   
8   as  i  explain  in  more  detail  below,  the  federal  governments  institutional  imperatives,  which  include 
running an efficient and effective immigration bureaucracy, can lead to federal-local divergence, even when 
party lines would suggest otherwise. in the case of the bush-era dhs, officials likely preferred something 
less than the sort of maximal, attrition through enforcement policy embodied in the predecessor laws to 
sb 1070  a divergence re-enforced by the bush administrations support of (ultimately failed) legislative 
overhauls in 2006 and 2007. 

515

enforcement, integration, and the future of immigration federalismsimilar laws, complementing and overshadowing suits brought by private litigants and the 
american civil liberties union (aclu). the lawsuit served both political and bureaucratic 
purposes. it provided a means for the administration to retake control of the immigration 
policy debate, using legal tools with the potential to stop in their tracks the restrictionist 
forces operating through local and state governments. by offering a robust defense of federal 
supremacy in immigration enforcement, the government also reasserted the authority of 
dhs and department of justice (doj) to determine the scope of the national enforcement 
agenda and to control the extent of the enforcement assistance local officials could provide. 
to  that  end,  during  litigation,  the  government  produced  a  guidance  document  defining 
the  sorts  of  intergovernmental  cooperation  permitted  by  the  ina  (dhs  2012),9  which 
expressly contemplates state and local assistance in federal enforcement. the memo listed 
a range of concrete examples that were notably far narrower and contained than what sb 
1070 promised.10 even as this document highlighted the federal governments dependency 
on local police, in particular in pursuing its enforcement mission, it rejected autonomous 
state lawmaking as a viable strategy.
in  arizona  v.  united  states,  the  supreme  court  issued  its  first  opinion  in  30  years  on 
the  subject  of  immigration  federalism  and  substantially  curtailed  (without  eliminating) 
autonomous local enforcement measures that diverged from the federal agenda. in striking 
down four of the five core provisions of sb 1070, the court handed the federal government 
a resounding and arguably novel victory in two ways. first, in invalidating the provision 
that would have made it a state misdemeanor for an unauthorized immigrant to apply for 
work, the court acknowledged that the state sought to advance one of the core objectives 
of federal law  the deterrence of unauthorized employment. it concluded, however, that 
federal law embodied a range of compromises among competing values, and the states 
adoption of a different means of achieving the same objective therefore thwarted federal 
law.11 even more significant, the court articulated a theory of preemption that could be 
understood as treating federal enforcement priorities, and not just congressional statutes, 
as federal law: a principal feature of the removal system is the broad discretion exercised 
by immigration officials . . . [the executive] must decide whether it makes sense to pursue 
removal at all.12 in other words, even if state enforcement provisions precisely mirror 
federal law, the latter would still be invalid because the federal executive necessarily uses 
its discretion in deciding to what extent to enforce the law.
arizona effectively eliminated localities ability to adopt an enforcement agenda expressly 
and clearly more robust than the federal governments agenda. the extent of enforcement 
federalism thus remains largely a function of federal policy. that said, the court did leave 
in place sb 1070s section 2(b), which became known during the public debate as the 
show me your papers provision. it requires local police to inquire into the immigration 
9   in light of laws passed by several states addressing the involvement by state and local law enforcement 
officers in federal enforcement of immigration laws, dhs concluded that this guidance would be appropriate 
to set forth dhss position on the proper role of state and local officers in this context (dhs 2012). 
10    examples  listed  by  dhs  include  participation  in  formal  cooperative  ventures,  such  as  joint  law 
enforcement task forces or deputization schemes where the federal government retains supervisory control, 
and lending direct assistance to federal officials by helping to execute warrants or providing equipment and 
facilities to federal officials (ibid., 13-15). 
11   arizona, 567 u.s. __, at 403-07.
12   id. at 2498-99.

516

journal on migration and human securitystatus of those with whom they come into contact, and its ongoing validity leaves localities 
with a measure of independence. 
at the time of the decision, many commentators framed the survival of section 2(b) as a 
hollow victory for the state, in large part because the court framed its analysis skeptically 
and left open the possibility of as-applied challenges alleging civil rights violations (martin 
2012). the courts decision also seemed to have punctured political momentum for local 
immigration policing, highlighting the truly political character of sb 1070. the distaste for 
the law held by some pragmatic local police officials loathe to entangle ordinary policing 
and immigration enforcement may also have deflated its promise as an enforcement tool 
(rodriguez 2015, 17). for reasons i discuss in part iii, however, this element of the courts 
decision may have contemporary consequences by providing legal support for new state 
laws, recently passed in texas, north carolina, georgia, and alabama, that would require 
local compliance with federal immigration requests.
the legal lines the court drew in arizona certainly advanced constitutional doctrine after 
a decade of uncertainty. but the most important outcome of arizona v. united states was 
arguably  political.  even  at  the  height  of  the  conflict  between arizona  and  the  federal 
government, the distance between the federal and state positions on enforcement policy 
was  in  large  measure  rhetorical  rather  than  actual.  even  a  federal  government  with  an 
immigration  reform  agenda,  like  the  obama  administration,  must  run  an  enforcement 
bureaucracy  and  utilize  the  resources  appropriated  to  it  by  congress.  the  obama 
administrations efforts to shape removals according to certain priorities appears to have 
borne fruit by shifting focus to high-value targets and away from the interior and to the 
border (rosenblum and meissner 2014, pp. 19-40). but the absolute numbers of removals 
remained high and the machinery of deportation in operation. 
as with much of immigration federalism, pro-enforcement local resistance was as much 
about creating a rhetorical frame for the immigration debate  that immigration should be 
controlled and the law enforced to the extent possible  as about the merits of particular 
enforcement  policies.  the  alternative  federal  narrative    of  humane  but  consistent 
enforcement  set a far different agenda for the larger debate. enforcement was to create 
confidence in the system in order to build political will for legislation that would include a 
legalization program and expand opportunities for lawful immigration. arizona v. united 
states helped ensure that the federal narrative prevailed. 
federal-local cooperation. as the most recent change in presidential administration has 
made vivid, the federal immigration narrative can change quickly. when the local desire to 
enforce the immigration laws meets an administration that actively seeks local cooperation 
as a means of multiplying its enforcement capacities and rhetoric, what does immigration 
federalism look like?
even if arizona v. united states has largely displaced autonomous state regulation, the 
domain of immigration federalism has not so much disappeared as shifted. zealous localities, 
aligned with a pro-enforcement federal government, can in theory play a significant role 
in immigration enforcement. even the obama administration emphasized the importance 
of local cooperation in enforcement, in part because the ina itself expressly accepts it and 

517

enforcement, integration, and the future of immigration federalismcreates vehicles for it.13 most immigration legislation sponsored by republicans in congress 
in recent years seeks to solidify or augment the local role, and even the comprehensive 
reform bill passed by the senate in 2013 with democratic leadership would have involved 
border state governors in enforcement decision-making.14
the most obvious vehicle for this brand of immigration federalism is the so-called 287(g) 
agreement, which congress added to the ina in 1996.15 pursuant to this provision, state and 
local police can opt to become quasi-immigration agents by entering into agreements with 
the federal government to receive training and subsequently perform certain immigration 
functions,  with  ultimate  supervision  coming  from  local  immigration  and  customs 
enforcement (ice) officials.16 whereas the obama administration actively sought to curtail 
the agreements that existed when it came into office (ice 2014), the trump-led dhs has 
touted  its  interest  in  expanding  the  program,  including  by  bringing  back  the  so-called 
task force model jettisoned by its predecessor, which enables local police to perform 
immigration functions while engaged in policing on the streets and in the community.17 
the  political  conditions  today  might  seem  ideal  for  an  expansion  of  the  program,  and 
yet certain institutional considerations are likely to mean that this form of immigration 
federalism will remain marginal. even during the bush administration, when agreements 
began to proliferate in number, the program remained small. at its peak in 2011, only 
72  agreements  existed,  despite  the  thousands  of  eligible  state,  local,  and  county  law 
enforcement agencies. simply put, there is very little to be gained for sheriffs and police 
chiefs  in  the  287(g)  arrangement.  even  in  pro-enforcement  states  and  localities,  the 
perceived costs of intertwining policing with immigration enforcement  the impact on 
community trust and relations and the diversion of resources away from the core mission of 
police departments  will restrain voluntary participation. in addition, the concrete benefits 
to local jurisdictions are likely to be minimal; though some local agents may welcome 
the  opportunity  to  participate  in  higher-prestige  federal  law  enforcement  functions,  the 
program is unlikely to yield actual law enforcement or public safety gains. as one scholar 
has described the program, it amounts to a solution in search of a problem (coonan 2013, 
283).
the cooperative terrain over the last decade has shifted instead to the secure communities 
program, which was launched by the bush administration, continued and then redesigned 
under  another  name  by  the  obama-led  dhs,  and  then  fully  resurrected  by  trump 

13   8 u.s.c. 1373(b) (requiring the federal government to accept inquiries from state and local police into 
the immigration status in the custody of the latter).
14   see border security, economic opportunity, and immigration modernization act of 2013, s. 744, 113th 
cong., s. 4 (2013). the bill would have created a commission that included border state governors and given 
it the responsibility to certify that the border had been secured before a legalization program could have 
been fully implemented.
15   8 u.s.c. 1357(g).
16   even without a formal 287(g) agreement, many localities enmesh themselves with the federal enforcement 
bureaucracy by, for example, entering into contracts with the federal government to permit the latter to use 
local jails as detention facilities.
17   a recent memorandum from the secretary of homeland security observes: [t]he ina 287(g) program 
has been a highly successful force multiplier . . . to the greatest extent practicable, the director of ice and 
commissioner of cbp shall expand the 287(g) program to include all qualified law enforcement agencies that 
request to participate (kelly 2017). 

518

journal on migration and human securityadministration  officials.  its  reach  far  exceeds  the  287(g)  program,  because  it  relies  on 
technology  to  harness  information  in  the  hands  of  local  police  regarding  potentially 
removable noncitizens, rather than on local personnel themselves, and since 2013 it has 
been operational across the country. 
in  the  main,  and  across  all  three  administrations,  this  form  of  immigration  federalism 
has had two key components, one of which leaves no genuine decision-making authority 
with  localities  and  the  other  of  which  has  become  a  flashpoint  of  federalism  conflict. 
the intergovernmental dynamic begins with information sharing. state and local police 
routinely and for criminal justice purposes share their arrest data with the federal bureau 
of investigation (fbi). as required by federal statute, the fbi then shares that information 
with its sister agency, dhs. dhs can then determine if a person in state or local custody 
is removable by comparing the arrest data to dhss own databases. obama-era efforts to 
discontinue secure communities in 2014 notwithstanding, this feature has remained in 
place continuously since 2008.
some localities have regarded the fbis sharing of their data with dhs as conscription 
into federal service raising constitutional concerns, and they have called on dhs to permit 
jurisdictions to opt out of the program (kalhan 2013, 1131). but as noted above, federal law 
directs the president to establish an interoperable system that facilitates data sharing across 
law enforcement agencies,18 and the law thus requires the fbi to share its data with dhs 
given appropriate technological capacities. more to the point, because localities voluntarily 
share their information with the federal government (i.e., the fbi), the downstream use of 
the data by the federal government does not amount to commandeering in the constitutional 
sense, because the federal government has not coerced localities into sharing their data in 
the first instance. this information-sharing component of enforcement policy ultimately 
reflects an end-run around federalism to a certain extent, because it occurs automatically 
and therefore eschews dependence on state and local officials themselves to support federal 
enforcement policy. but that fact has not quieted the federalism debate, largely because of 
what happens next.
the  federalism-relevant  component  of  secure  communities  arises  with  the  choice  the 
information sharing creates for dhs  what, precisely, should dhs do with the knowledge 
that a potentially removable noncitizen is in local custody? both dhs and localities have 
discretion over the answer. the traditional answer under secure communities has been 
for the federal government to issue a detainer request, asking localities to hold the person 
in question for up to 48 hours, until ice officials can take custody and determine whether 
and how to start the federal deportation process. despite some confusion among localities 
that has since been clarified by several courts,19 detainers are voluntary requests, not legal 

18   8 u.s.c.  1722 ([t]he president shall develop and implement an interoperable electronic data system 
to provide current and immediate access to information in databases of federal law enforcement agencies 
and the intelligence community that is relevant to determine whether to issue a visa or to determine the 
admissibility or deportability of an alien.).
19   see, for example, galarza v. szalczyk, 745 f.3d 634 (3rd cir. 2014).

519

enforcement, integration, and the future of immigration federalismcommands.20  for  dhs  to  demand  compliance  would  cross  over  into  unconstitutional 
commandeering by using local institutions and personnel to enforce federal law without 
the consent of the state entities.21
as  discussed  in  more  detail  below,  these  circumstances  created  by  existing  federalism 
doctrine have made detainer policy an important point of controversy for intergovernmental 
relations when the periphery and the center differ in their objectives. at least for the zealous 
jurisdictions considered here, honoring detainer requests seems like an easy and obvious 
way to advance immigration enforcement.22 and yet, even for pro-enforcement jurisdictions, 
external constraints may limit the extent of cooperation. a growing number of lower courts 
have held that local detainer authority is limited by the fourth amendments prohibition on 
search and seizure and the requirement that police have probable cause before making an 
arrest or holding someone in custody beyond their state-law release date.23 as this doctrine 
develops, even zealous enforcement jurisdictions may eschew certain detainer requests for 
fear of incurring constitutional liability.
a  zealous  enforcement  jurisdiction  might  also  adopt  any  number  of  complementary 
enforcement  measures  that  have  not  been  preempted  by  arizona  v.  united  states. 
the immigrant policy project of  the national conference of state legislators (ncsl) 
documents  some  examples,24  including  laws  that  require  government  contractors  and 
subcontractors to use e-verify  an electronic database that checks whether a potential 
employee is authorized to work in the united states  and laws that prohibit the use of 
consular or embassy documents to determine identity or residence for law enforcement 
purposes.25 in a counter-precedent to arizona, too, the supreme court in 2011 upheld an 
arizona  law  that  threatened  to  rescind  the  business  licenses  of  companies  that  did  not 
comply with federal prohibitions on the hiring of unauthorized workers, finding that the 
law fell within an express clause of the ina permitting certain types of state support of the 

20   8 c.f.r.  287.7(a).
21   printz v. united states, 521 u.s. 898 (1994) (holding that federal government could not require local law 
enforcement to assist in the enforcement of federal gun control statute in light of the tenth amendments 
protection of state sovereignty).
22    other  means  of  facilitating  federal  enforcement  have  developed  over  the  years.  perhaps  the  most 
important intergovernmental program outside of secure communities has been the criminal alien program, 
through which immigration officials operate inside corrections facilities in order to coordinate and hasten the 
deportation proceedings of noncitizens convicted of state law crimes (schuck 2013, 612). 
23   see, e.g., morales v. chadbourne, 793 f.3d 208, 215 (1st cir. 2015); miranda-olivares v. clackamas 
cnty., no. 3:12-cv-02317, 2014 wl 1414305, at *10 (d. or. apr. 11, 2014).
24   according to ncsl (2015, 1; 2016, 1), state legislatures enacted 185 immigration-related law in 2013, 
171 in 2014, and 216 in 2015. ncsl defines immigration-related law broadly, and the measures it documents 
cut across numerous regulatory arenas, including law enforcement, education, public benefits, and voting. 
many of the measures promote immigrant integration or are otherwise designed to protect the interests of 
immigrants, including the unauthorized. 
25   see, for example, north carolina house bill 318, amending the states e-verify requirement to make it 
stricter, and prohibiting the use of consular documents (ncsl 2016). 

520

journal on migration and human securityemployer sanctions regime.26 few if any states appear to have followed arizonas lead in 
pursuing this particular enforcement strategy, but it remains lawful. 
the utility or success of these complementary measures may be largely independent of 
whether the local and federal objectives align; local jurisdictions can adopt them regardless 
of the identity of the presidential administration. in theory, having a zealous enforcement 
regime in washington could either propel or obviate the enactment of such laws at the 
local level. vigorous enforcement rhetoric from the federal government, coupled with the 
opportunity to informally cooperate with federal officials, might satisfy the local enforcement 
impulse. or, the presence of a like-minded, pro-enforcement regime in washington could 
stir local interest, generated either through the work of the interest group or intraparty 
networks that have been pushing pro-enforcement policy at all levels of government, or as 
the result of energized public opinion on the immigration question.  

b. enforcement skepticism

enforcement  skepticism  abounds  in  our  federal  system.  few,  if  any,  localities  reject 
immigration enforcement of all kinds (in contrast to some immigrants rights advocates). 
but  local  skepticism  embodies  an  overarching  concern  that  immigration  enforcement 
will have a negative impact on local communities  a concern typically buttressed by 
a  commitment  to  immigrant  integration  regardless  of  lawful  status.  this  orientation 
is common among political officials and bureaucrats in immigrant-heavy cities such as 
new york, chicago, houston, and san francisco, as well as in democratic states with 
large  immigrant  populations,  such  as  california  and  illinois.  but  small  towns  such  as 
new haven, connecticut, have also been the sites of some of the fiercest resistance to 
federal enforcement tactics, as well as pro-immigrant politics, and progressive cities within 
conservative states also have adopted the skeptics posture. 
the central federalism question these skeptical jurisdictions face is whether and to what 
extent to cooperate with the federal government by honoring detainer requests. by one 
estimate,  over  300  jurisdictions  have  adopted  some  form  of  noncooperation  strategy27 
(henderson 2014). sometimes called trust acts, or colloquially referred to as sanctuary 

26   chamber of commerce v. whiting, 563 u.s. 582 (2011). the arizona law at issue in this case survived 
preemption largely because of a savings clause in the ina. even though congress preempted all state laws 
that sanctioned employers for hiring unauthorized workers in 1986, when it adopted a federal employer 
sanctions regime, it expressly provided that states could continue to use licensing and other similar laws 
to regulate. the arizona law fell squarely within the text of the savings clause, and so claims that the law 
otherwise undermined the federal scheme or that congress intended the law to have a narrower reach did 
not persuade the court. the court also held that arizonas e-verify mandate did not conflict with federal 
law, id. at 608, confirming that states retained authority to adopt measures of this kind to deter the hiring of 
unauthorized workers.
27   the anti-detainer policy is the most recent instantiation of the noncooperation impulse. in the 1990s, 
cities such as new york and los angeles adopted policies that prohibited local officials from communicating 
immigration status information to the federal government. congress eventually preempted these laws in 1996, 
and the us court of appeals for the second circuit rejected a claim brought by then-mayor rudolph giuliani 
that  the  1996  law  violated  the tenth amendment  by  commandeering  local  governments  as  immigration 
enforcers. see new york v. united states, 169 f.3d 29 (2nd cir. 1999).

521

enforcement, integration, and the future of immigration federalismlaws,28 these measures delineate under what circumstances states and localities will honor 
detainer  requests.  though  few  if  any  jurisdictions  categorically  rule  out  cooperation, 
the adoption of some form of noncooperation law underscores that localities retain the 
discretion to decide what circumstances warrant enforcement. 
these policies have both pragmatic and symbolic dimensions. they reflect concern that 
conflating policing and immigration enforcement will undermine trust in public officials and 
police and could even undermine public safety.29 but they also embody a political position 
on the immigration debate writ large  that immigrants or some subset of immigrants (the 
unauthorized without a criminal record, for example) ought not be deported. with respect 
to the former, it remains empirically contestable whether the noncooperation laws actually 
promote public safety. and whether they result in fewer deportations also remains to be 
meaningfully established. 
but whether noncooperation laws can actually claim their supposed pragmatic benefits, 
they do succeed in joining a political fight. localities that have resisted federal enforcement 
in this way have decided for themselves whether to be complicit in federal immigration 
enforcement. the  noncooperation  movement  as  a  whole  offers  an  alternative  vision  of 
immigrants  place  in  the  community  to  the  exclusionist  narrative  advanced  by  zealous 
enforcement  jurisdictions.  indeed,  the  trust  acts  and  other  similar  laws  reflect  the 
influence of a widespread immigrants rights movement that has sought to use the federal 
structure to its advantage by creating alternative legal regimes (rodriguez 2015, 12-15; 
vock 2013).
federal-local polarization. in 2017, a highly polarized version of the intergovernmental 
dynamic  created  by  local  enforcement  skepticism  dominates  federalism  debates.  on 
january  25,  2017,  president  trump  issued  an  executive  order  (eo)  laying  out  the 
administrations interior enforcement policies.30 section 9 of the order targets so-called 
sanctuary jurisdictions, threatening to rescind federal funds for jurisdictions that refuse to 
comply with 8 u.s.c. 1373, a provision of the ina designed to facilitate local cooperation 
with federal law. in order to prevent local officials from shielding any immigration status 
information  in  their  possession  from  federal  enforcement  officials,  congress  enacted 
1373, declaring it unlawful for states and their subdivisions to prohibit their personnel 
from  communicating  immigration  information  to  the  federal  government.  in  addition 
to targeting noncompliance with 1373, the executive order also threatens appropriate 
enforcement action against any entity that has in effect a statute, policy, or practice that 
prevents or hinders the enforcement of federal law.31 in response to the eo, a handful 
of localities around the country have taken the federal government to court, leading at 

28   the sanctuary designation harkens back to a movement of the 1980s of churches providing safe haven to 
unauthorized immigrants cum refugees fleeing the civil wars of central america.
29   one comprehensive academic study finds that secure communities, which entails the detainers some 
localities resist for public safety reasons, has not reduced police ability to resolve crimes (cox and miles 
2017), though the effects detainers might have on trust and the psychic burdens they impose on immigrants 
may be hard to measure. 
30   enhancing public safety in the interior of the united states, exec. order no. 13768, 82 fed. reg. 8799 
(jan. 25, 2017).
31   id. 

522

journal on migration and human securityleast one district court to cast constitutional doubt on the order, despite acknowledging the 
federal governments authority to take the steps it outlined in the course of litigation.32 
in this sort of polarized context, the federalism question becomes twofold: what can the 
federal government do to reign in resistant localities? and what are the legal foundations 
for ongoing local resistance? any legal analysis will depend on the precise reach of the 
federal and local actions at issue. but a few general principles provide a framework that 
can be applied to federal-local tensions of this sort.
federal power is simultaneously limited and broad. on the first score, the anti-commandeering 
doctrine interprets the tenth amendment and the federalist structure of the constitution 
to prohibit the federal government from requiring states and their subdivisions to act as 
federal agents in the implementation of federal law.33 any federal law or interpretation of 
federal law by the executive that would treat detainer requests as mandatory fits comfortably 
within the scope of commandeering, as it would reflect the expectation that local police and 
their facilities and resources serve as agents of immigration enforcement, whether local 
officials consent or not.34 
but the federal government can accomplish a great deal through its use of the spending 
power that it could not otherwise achieve through direct regulation. congress can create 
incentives  for  localities  to  serve  federal  objectives  by  conditioning  federal  funds  on 
compliance with certain terms. this power is not unlimited, and the supreme court has 
recently reinvigorated what had come to be seen as a perfunctory set of doctrinal limits 
on federal power.35 in the interests of federalism, the exercise of the spending power must 
conform to certain criteria: (1) the condition must be unambiguous and imposed before 
funds have been distributed; (2) any condition must be germane to the federal program 

32   county of santa clara v. trump, __f. supp. 3d__, 2017 wl 1459081 (n.d. cal. 2017). the decision 
is at once narrow and broad. the governments litigating position before the district court was that section 
9 of the eo did nothing more than direct the attorney general to rescind grant monies to jurisdictions that 
failed  to  comply  with  the  statute,  where  the  grants  in  question  already  required,  as  a  term  of  the  grant, 
compliance with the federal statute. the court acknowledged the federal governments authority to take away 
funds that already had been made contingent on compliance with 1373, thus giving the government what 
it purported to want. and yet, the court went to great lengths to reject the governments construction of the 
order, concluding that it would have rendered the order toothless. instead, the court read the eo to potentially 
reach a much larger pool of funds for a wider range of local actions and then proceeded to conclude that its 
reading raised serious constitutional problems under federalism and spending clause doctrine.
33   new york v. united states, 505 u.s. 144 (1992) (striking down as unconstitutional commandeering a 
federal statute that required states that did not comply with federal scheme to dispose of radioactive waste 
to take title to the waste); printz v. united states, 521 u.s. 898 (1994) (applying commandeering doctrine to 
state executive officials).
34   a 2016 report by the inspector general of the doj offers a potentially expansive but also likely erroneous 
interpretation of 1373  that the statute could encompass policies that prohibit honoring civil detainer 
requests, even if they do not prohibit information sharing with the federal government, because they affect 
ices interaction with local officials. this interpretation strays far beyond the text of the actual statutory 
provision. because reading the law to require compliance with civil detainer requests would raise serious 
constitutional concerns under the commandeering doctrine, there is little if any justification for reading the 
law so atextually. see horowitz (2016). 
35   national federation of independent business v. sebelius, 567 u.s. 519 (2012) (striking down the structure 
of the affordable care acts expansion of medicaid because it made the entirety of the states medicaid 
funding contingent on expanding the program according to the terms of the law).

523

enforcement, integration, and the future of immigration federalismpursuant to which the funds are being appropriated; and (3) the financial inducement cannot 
be overly coercive.
each of these criteria leaves considerable room for interpretation, particularly the question 
of what amounts to coercion. but especially since the supreme courts reliance on the 
spending clause to invalidate the medicaid expansion component of the affordable care 
act, courts have demonstrated a willingness to test the federal governments positions. in 
the case of the trump eo, the federal government offered an interpretation of the order that 
conformed to existing doctrine  that it directed the attorney general to rescind a small 
number of federal grants already clearly conditioned on compliance with 1373 from those 
grant recipients that willfully violated the statute. but the district court rejected this reading 
of the eo, finding instead that it could be read to reach all federal funds, and not just law 
enforcement funds that might have some nexus to immigration enforcement and 1373. 
moreover, the order was not clear about what constituted a violation of its conditions.
beyond the particularities of the january trump eo, at least three important conclusions 
about federal power over localities emerge from the case. first, the district court emphasized 
that the spending power belongs to congress and not the executive, which by the courts 
lights meant that only congress could place conditions on federal grants  a principle 
that would significantly limit a new administration from unilaterally using federal funds as 
incentives. this conclusion must be complemented with the observations that congress can 
delegate to the executive the authority to set terms for its own grant programs. requiring 
compliance  with  federal  law,  whatever  one  thinks  of  the  law,  seems  straightforwardly 
legitimate. 
second, these observations about congresss spending authority open up a whole range of 
possibilities for a federal government seeking to tamp down local enforcement resistance. 
it is unlikely a court would find a constitutional problem with a statute that conditioned 
relevant  funds  not  only  on  compliance  with  1373,  but  also  with  detainer  requests 
themselves, unless, of course, either of those conditions is itself unconstitutional (on which 
more below). in other words, with a willing congress, the federal government could really 
test how far localities commitment to noncooperation runs.36
and third, the legality and concrete effects of the executive order may ultimately be of 
secondary importance to the larger political purpose of the eo and other administration 
actions like it. the governments own interest in 1373 seems somewhat modest. some 
anecdotal  evidence  exists  of  local  government  personnel  taking  it  upon  themselves  to 
inform the federal government of the immigration status of people with whom they had 
come into contact  the acts protected by 1373. but there is no evidence or even really 
strong reason to believe that government personnel would be motivated or able to report 
immigration status on a large enough scale to make any meaningful difference in federal 

36   as soon as the president announced his executive order, miami-dade county rescinded its noncooperation 
law, citing its desire to maintain its federal funding. leaving aside the likelihood that the county misunderstood 
the legal effect of the order and acted hastily, its actions may well reveal that it and perhaps other jurisdictions 
only tepidly support the noncooperation movement.

524

journal on migration and human securityenforcement efforts.37 this actuality also re-enforces that, for enforcement skeptics at the 
local level, very little is actually at stake as a practical matter when it comes to 1373. 
the stakes in the debate over 1373, then, are largely political, expressive, and rhetorical. 
the trump eo amounts to the use of the bully pulpit to persuade or shame localities into 
joining the enforcement bandwagon, or to otherwise build political momentum for a robust 
and proud enforcement strategy regardless of local opposition. and the local resistance to 
the order, including the decision to file suit even before the government had taken any action 
to rescind funds, fits within a larger movement to create a locally based counternarrative 
to immigrants as public safety risks who ought to be removed to promote the rule of law.
to be sure, to sideline the spending clause as a source of federal authority, out-and-out 
resistance by enforcement skeptics could take other forms, too. enforcement skeptics could 
challenge the very constitutionality of 1373, as santa clara county did in its complaint 
against the trump eo, declaring that it itself violated the federal statute. but in addition to 
there being little to gain from ridding the code of 1373, invalidating 1373 would require 
expanding  the  commandeering  doctrine  to  cover  at  least  some  information  sharing. a 
plausible claim could be made that 1373 prevents state and local governments, as well as 
their sub-entities such as police departments, from supervising their employees in order to 
serve federal immigration purposes  form of commandeering. but drawing the doctrine 
this broadly could have significant and unpredictable downstream consequences for federal 
law and policy. in other words, enforcement skeptics should be careful of expanding an 
already controversial tenant of federalism that limits federal power in a context where the 
local  position  happens  to  match  their  ideological  preferences,  because  that  match  may 
not always exist. indeed, cause-oriented mobilization of structural constitutional doctrines 
always present this risk and therefore should be handled with caution and humility.
without  relying  on  federalism  doctrine,  enforcement  skeptics  who  seek  to  end  local 
cooperation  with  federal  enforcement  altogether  could  also  pursue  fourth amendment 
litigation. as  noted,  a  number  of  courts  have  found  that  localities  lacked  authority  to 
comply with particular detainers, on the ground that local police had no probable cause 
to hold the individual in question. this conclusion reflects both the general requirements 
of  the  fourth amendment,  as  well  as  the  principle  that  local  jurisdictions  do  not  have 
independent authority to enforce immigration law. as instances of courts finding fourth 
amendment violations in as-applied cases accumulate, the threat of constitutional liability 
by itself may lead jurisdictions to eschew ever-larger numbers of detainer requests. not only 
could this approach significantly constrain the federal governments reliance on detainers, 
it also could significantly curtail the federal government of the spending clause as means 
of instigating compliance with detainers, since conditions on grants may not themselves be 
violations of the law. 
cautious intergovernmental compromise. even when enforcement skeptics are in office 
at both the local and the federal level, intergovernmental tensions will persist. even though 
the obama administration advocated legislation that would have expanded immigration 
in myriad ways, and used its administrative authorities to grant large-scale enforcement 
37   the central and most fruitful local avenue for federal enforcement comes from the arrest data the federal 
government acquires through secure communities, making detainer policy the far more consequential site 
of local enforcement and resistance.

525

enforcement, integration, and the future of immigration federalismrelief, the local noncooperation movement flowered among democratic jurisdictions during 
the same years. the likes of chicago and new york, despite being crucial democratic 
strongholds, presented bureaucratic headaches for the obama-era dhs. 
this tension among political allies stems to a significant degree from institutional factors. 
the federal government simply cannot abandon immigration enforcement altogether. by 
charging it with the enforcement of the ina, congress has delegated responsibility to enforce 
the nations immigration laws and appropriated significant sums of money to effectuate that 
responsibility. by law and custom, the administration cannot fail to honor either form of 
delegation, even as it may have considerable authority to make discretionary judgments 
about the scope and nature of enforcement policy (cox and rodriguez 2015, 142-65, 210-
14). by contrast, local jurisdictions need not have anything to do with immigration law 
or enforcement to satisfy their governmental responsibilities. immigration enforcement at 
the very least can be a distraction from the management of local public welfare, if not an 
outright impediment to serving the local interest, for some of the very reasons identified by 
the noncooperation movement.
the notion that a skeptical local jurisdiction would cooperate with federal enforcement 
therefore  might  seem  like  an  impossibility    a  null  set.  but  enforcement  cooperation 
extends  well  beyond  local  assistance  of  federal  deportation  policy  and  can  include 
joint efforts that even enforcement skeptics could support, such as cooperation to target 
smuggling rings (meissner and kerwin 2009, 48-49, 54). and with respect to deportation 
policy, there could be pragmatic reasons for local skeptics to reach an enforcement dtente 
with the federal government, even though localities can more comfortably and visibly reject 
immigration enforcement than the federal government (rodriguez 2015, 15-16, 20). indeed, 
few if any of the anti-detainer policies adopted at the local level eschew detainer requests 
altogether. instead, localities have defined for themselves the sorts of detainers they will 
honor, usually recognizing the prudence of responding to detainers for people who have 
committed serious or violent crimes. this kind of partial cooperation reflects recognition 
at the local level of a potential public safety dimension to immigration enforcement. but 
perhaps more important, it demonstrates the importance of maintaining functional, cordial 
intergovernmental  relations,  given  the  value  of  federal-local  cooperation  not  only  with 
respect to law enforcement writ large, but also across other domains. 
embodying  this  pragmatic  tendency,  some  jurisdictions  have  begun  developing  model 
detainer  ordinances.  in  particular,  to  address  potential  fourth  amendment  liability, 
jurisdictions might opt to decline detainers that are not accompanied by a warrant or some 
indication of probable cause that the person in custody is deportable. as many have done, 
localities could exercise their own judgment concerning the types of underlying crimes 
that warrant the initiation of removal proceedings, declining detainer requests based only 
on immigration status violations. to complement this prioritization, localities might also 
enumerate for themselves the positive equities, such as community or family ties, that would 
warrant declining a detainer request in individual circumstances. these sorts of judgments 
 of when removal is appropriate  might seem like precisely the sorts of determinations 
that ought to be left to the federal government. but because they fundamentally implicate 
the local governments relationship to its own community, they are judgments that local 
officials are well placed, perhaps even better-placed, to make, as well.

526

journal on migration and human securitywhen enforcement skeptics populate both the local level and the political positions of the 
federal administration, noncooperation laws that embody pragmatic compromise arguably 
represent a form of enforcement collaboration  a way of recognizing the inevitability of 
some form of deportation regime while working however awkwardly toward ensuring its 
basic fairness. put another way, otherwise skeptical local jurisdictions might better justify 
calibrated cooperation when the political officials in charge of the enforcement regime self-
consciously define their policies to achieve humane and targeted enforcement. this uneasy 
but not necessarily oppositional relationship arguably presents the best state of affairs from 
a  systemic  perspective,  if  we  accept  a  baseline  legitimacy  to  immigration  enforcement 
and acknowledge the integration of the enforcement regime, because it helps to keep the 
federal government accountable. 
the  obama  administrations  now  superseded  priorities  enforcement  program  (pep) 
reflects  this  sort  of  equilibrium.  in  november  2014,  then-dhs  secretary  jeh  johnson 
announced pep as a rebranding and reformulation of secure communities, in response 
to pressure from enforcement-skeptical jurisdictions. governors, mayors, and state and 
local law enforcement officials around the country, he noted, have increasingly refused 
to cooperate with [secure communities] . . . the overarching goal of secure communities 
remains in my view a valid and important law enforcement objective, but a fresh start and 
a new program are necessary (johnson 2014). the program would have maintained the 
data-sharing feature of secure communities, which is required by statute, but it would 
have changed the dhs follow-up strategy. instead of issuing detainer requests, ice simply 
would have notified local officials if a potentially removable person was in their custody, 
thus re-enforcing local discretion over how to proceed.
beyond developing a cooperative but wary relationship with a federal enforcement apparatus 
whose  policymakers  might  share  certain  skeptical  objectives,  resistant  localities  could 
take other steps to help disentangle local law enforcement from immigration enforcement 
without  engaging  in  outright  defiance. as  noted  at  the  outset,  state  and  local  criminal 
justice systems feed the immigration bureaucracy not only through the decisions of police, 
but also through the charging decisions made by prosecutors. because criminal convictions 
under state law become the basis for removal in many cases, state and local prosecutors 
exert  tremendous  indirect  effect  on  enforcement  policy.  developing  charging  practices 
with  immigration  consequences  in  mind  thus  could  reduce  the  number  of  noncitizens 
in the potential enforcement pool. the maryland states attorneys office, for example, 
recently has instructed prosecutors to consider the immigration consequences for potential 
defendants, victims, and witnesses of charging minor, nonviolent crimes (fenton 2017). 
of course, when determining prosecutorial priorities within the criminal justice context, 
the immigration consequences of a conviction can represent but one factor; it hardly seems 
prudent to create a system where immigration consequences drive criminal justice policy, 
and backlash by the public and lawmakers against broad policies of this sort is likely to be 
swift. but as an equity, those consequences can quite reasonably be taken into account. it 
would be perfectly appropriate for state and local prosecutors offices, as a matter of policy, 
to include immigration consequences as a relevant general factor in guiding discretionary 
judgments (motomura 2011).

527

enforcement, integration, and the future of immigration federalismthe varieties of enforcement federalism thus look something like the following:
                                      resistance to                       cooperation with 
                                     federal priorities                  federal priorities 

t
n
e
m
e
c
r
o
f
n
e
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

m
s
i
c
i
t
p
e
k
s

 
s
u
o
l
a
e
z

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
t
n
e
m
e
c
r
o
f
n
e

both enforcement enthusiasts and enforcement skeptics at the local level will be able to 
advance their agendas regardless of who controls the federal enforcement bureaucracy. in the 
former case, localities can adopt laws in aid of enforcement that have escaped preemption. 
the  skeptics  can  take  advantage  of  conservative  federalism  doctrines  that  prevent  the 
federal  government  from  coopting  local  authorities  to  limit  their  own  participation  in 
enforcement, and they can manage their own criminal justice systems with a view to how 
they feed into the federal immigration system. 
but  the  scope  and  tenor  of  immigration  federalism  will  always  remain  a  function  of 
intergovernmental dynamics. those dynamics will be shaped by a set of legal relationships 
and  constitutional  doctrines  that  the  federal  courts  have  done  much  to  refine  in  recent 
years, precisely because immigration federalism has filled judicial dockets. perhaps more 
important, the nature of the federal-local relationship will vary in response to shifts in 
political control at each level of government, even as it embodies persistent institutional 
tensions. and in mediating this interplay of politics and bureaucracy, the architects of any 
enforcement federalism strategy will have to grapple with the central question of the place 
of immigrants in our society.

ii. integration federalism: political will and bureaucratic 
capacity
despite the fact that immigration law and the immigration bureaucracy emanate from and 
are controlled by the federal government, washington historically has played a very limited 
role in the formulation and implementation of integration policy. as a 2011 government 
accountability office report notes, no single federal entity has been designated to lead the 
creation, implementation, and coordination of a national immigrant integration capability 
(gao 2011, 25). instead, immigrant integration largely has been a private sector affair, with 
state and local institutions playing crucial roles as well in devising affirmative integration 

528

journal on migration and human securitypolicies. in the integration and acculturation of immigrant children, for example, the local 
public schools play the single most important and comprehensive role. and a variety of 
state  services  and  public-private  partnerships  provide  language  instruction  and  civics 
education, job training, and assistance with public benefits. many of the federal integration 
programs that do exist, primarily to aid in the resettlement of refugees, involve contracts 
with ngos to provide basic services, or are otherwise run through state agencies.
as  with  enforcement  federalism,  integration  federalism  captures  the  ideological 
polarization of the country over the place of immigrants in american communities and 
their  role  in  the  nations  future.  this  divergence  has  long-standing  historical  roots.  in 
the antebellum period, for example, states in the west and south of the country adopted 
policies to attract immigrants in order literally to build their communities. eastern seaboard 
states, by contrast, sought to drive immigrants away because they perceived them as public 
burdens and sources of crime (salyer 1995, 4-5). in the years leading up to the chinese 
exclusion acts and the decades that followed, many states, including california, adopted 
laws restricting immigrants ability to earn a livelihood or take advantage of local public 
resources.  today,  many  states  and  localities  seek  to  ground  and  improve  the  lives  of 
immigrants, often regardless of their legal status. these local integration measures aim to 
secure immigrants long-term political incorporation and economic and financial stability, 
as well as their cultural affiliation and sense of social solidarity with those who make up 
the  communities  around  them.  other  jurisdictions  remain  agnostic  or  indifferent  to  the 
incorporation enterprise. still others actively seek to drive immigrants away  to promote 
their  attrition    primarily  with  the  sort  of  enforcement  federalism  above,  but  also  by 
closing many local institutions and benefits to immigrant participation (suro 2015, 1-25).
a  thorough  accounting  of  federalisms  role  in  shaping  the  possibilities  for  immigrant 
integration is well beyond the scope of this paper. we would need to begin by defining 
the thorny concepts of integration and acculturation and articulating a set of markers to 
determine  success.  from  there,  a  discussion  of  the  particular  policies  and  institutional 
commitments  that  facilitate  integration  could  begin.  the  possibilities  for  affirmative 
integration strategies in todays context, as well as the particular role the federal government 
might play, have been covered expertly and comprehensively elsewhere in this series (de 
graauw and bloemraad 2017, 105-23). 
but the historical and contemporary relevance of federalism to the project of immigrant 
integration,  as  well  as  the  potential  effects  of  the  enforcement  federalism  discussed  in 
parts i and iii on the prospects of immigrant integration, warrant making three conceptual 
points about federalism and integration. first, the problem of unauthorized immigration 
looms large in integration policy, and only congress can decisively address the matter. 
the  absence  of  legal  status,  in  the  main,  deprives  noncitizens  of  the  capacity  to  work 
lawfully and therefore of adequate labor and employment protections. it also creates an 
inherent instability in immigrants lives (for fear of removal) that diminishes the incentives 
and opportunities for making investments that would enable long-term settlement, such 
as language acquisition, civic knowledge, and home ownership. and it can heighten the 
psychological and financial burdens on mixed-status families. to be sure, unauthorized 
immigrants have become deeply embedded in their communities, and those who arrived 
as youth are functionally american  the very justifications for legislative legalization 

529

enforcement, integration, and the future of immigration federalismand administrative relief. the creation by the executive branch of discretionary statuses, 
including the large-scale deferred action granted by the obama administration, have helped 
ameliorate the disabilities associated with lack of status. but the 2016 election underscores 
the fragility and inadequacy of discretionary statuses, at least as mechanisms of stabilizing 
the lives of unauthorized immigrants and those with whom they associate. the lack of legal 
status will always be a drag on social status.
a  great  deal  of  contemporary  immigration  federalism,  both  of  the  enforcement  and 
integration varieties, consists of a debate about the meaning of unauthorized status and 
its  relevance  to  community  participation  (rodriguez  2008,  581-600).  like  past  federal 
administrations, some states and localities have sought to ameliorate the lack of status with 
the regulatory authorities at their disposal. in tandem with their enforcement skepticism, 
cities and states such as new york, chicago, and california and its localities, have attempted 
stabilize the status of unauthorized immigrants, including through the extension of benefits 
and legal protections, such as in-state tuition, drivers licenses or municipal identification 
cards,  and  labor  and  employment  guarantees  (ramakrishnan  2015,  2-6).  enforcement 
enthusiasts have done the same, not only through indifference to immigrant integration, but 
also through measures as draconian as prohibiting landlords from renting to unauthorized 
immigrants38 (suro 2015, 9-17).
of course, as with any issue, the approach to unauthorized immigration does not track 
partisan lines neatly. some indifferent or even hostile jurisdictions have adopted in-state 
tuition laws, for example, or a variety of affirmative integration measures (rodriguez 2008, 
579-80, 585-86). as discussed in more detail below, within hostile states, progressive cities 
seek to protect and incorporate the unauthorized in some ways. and even in states with 
historical commitments to integration, the political will behind integration strategies can 
wane in response to politics. in illinois, for example, the current republican governor, 
upon taking office, proposed to slash spending for affirmative integration programs and 
rescinded two executive orders issued by his predecessor, one of which prohibited state 
law  enforcement  from  stopping  individuals  on  the  basis  of  immigration  or  citizenship 
status, and the other aimed to enable residents of the state to benefit from deferred action 
for childhood arrivals  even as he proclaimed support for immigration reform (tareen 
2015). but this variation is simply further evidence of the churning federalism will produce 
until the federal government resolves the status question.
a legal framework that draws from similar resources as the one governing enforcement 
federalism also structures this domain. anti-integration measures can run afoul of federal 
policy and therefore be preempted.39 and the equal protection clause provides a strong 

38   the federal courts of appeals have taken differing positions on whether the ina preempts these landlord 
ordinances. compare villas at parkside v. farmers branch, 688 f.3d 801 (5th cir. 2012) (concluding that 
local landlord ordinances constitute de facto attempts to regulate immigration and are thus preempted), with 
keller v. fremont, 719 f.3d 931 (8th cir. 2013)  (concluding that the connection between landlord laws 
and immigration regulation was too attenuated to justify preemption). the supreme court has declined to 
intervene.
39   see villas at parkside, 688 f.3d 801; keller, 719 f.3d 931.; arizona dream act coalition v. brewer, 757 
f.3d 1053 (9th cir. 2014) (issuing preliminary injunction against arizona law that would have denied drivers 
licenses to recipients of deferred action for childhood arrivals, on the ground that plaintiffs were likely to 
succeed with their claim that the state law violated the equal protection clause). 

530

journal on migration and human securitybulwark for legal immigrants against state discrimination and a potentially available but 
still  weak  and  uncertain  tool  for  unauthorized  immigrants.  but  from  the  point  of  view 
of  integration  policy,  this  framework  simply  manages  the  political  contestation  around 
immigrants social place and restrains states and localities from engaging in egregious forms 
of discrimination. it cannot cure the ultimate instability of unlawful status. the persistence 
and irresolution of the federalism debates over the meaning of unauthorized status point 
to the need for federal intervention, not only if our goal is to anchor and improve the lives 
of unauthorized immigrants not only to provide stability, but also in the interest of shifting 
integration federalism  whether of the enforcement or integration variety  to more 
constructive and less legally contested terrain.
second,  the  need  for  federal  leadership  on  the  status  question  does  not  mean  that  the 
work of integration should pass to the federal government. instead, integration policy writ 
large would benefit from a well-conceived, intergovernmental strategy that plays to the 
institutional competencies of the different levels of government. the federal governments 
primary role, as the government least connected to the integrative institutions described 
above,  should  be  to  provide  a  strong  integration  scaffolding,  which  would  include 
sharing information, coordinating best practices, and providing robust resource support. 
indeed, were congress to adopt a legalization program to address the status question, its 
implementation would necessarily depend on state and local institutions working with the 
private  and  nonprofit  sector,  simply  because  federal  capacity  does  not  exist  to  provide 
outreach to eligible immigrants, protect them from fraudulent service providers, assemble 
the  requisite  documentation  to  support  a  claim  of  legalization,  or  provide  the  english-
language and civics instruction that likely would be necessary to qualifying for legalization 
(pew charitable trusts 2014, 2-3). 
as with the federalization of any issue, the risks of shifting the weight of integration policy 
to the federal government would be two-fold. centralization can have a leveling effect, 
which in the integration context could mean providing less support and creative problem 
solving than would come from the most dynamic states and localities with the deepest 
experience integrating immigrants and their children. and, robust centralization could also 
threaten to turn integration policy into a homogenizing and ideological project, as opposed 
to a quotidian, practical one. over-federalization could create pressure on lawmakers or 
officials to define a concept of americanness to guide integration, which if done without 
nuance or openness, could stifle policy flexibility, such as by prohibiting or discouraging 
native language use in language education. 
of course, some states will be well suited to the role of integration innovation  california 
and new york leap immediately to mind. but other parts of the country will have neither the 
political will nor the bureaucratic capacities required to develop true integration policies, 
thus leaving integration to the vagaries of social life, or the private sector, which may or may 
not be robust in any given jurisdiction. and states, including todays integration paragon 

531

enforcement, integration, and the future of immigration federalismof california,40 might themselves succumb to the over-ideologization of integration. but 
this  possibility  of  variation    of  highs  and  lows  resulting from  political diversity and 
different historical trajectories  is precisely why the federal governments role should be 
as a facilitator rather than as the primary player. the federal government can coordinate a 
national integration strategy that nonetheless permits, prioritizes, and harnesses local and 
private sector leadership.
third,  the  value  of  a  disaggregated  integration  strategy  should  not  be  understood  as 
obviating the importance of a national concept of citizenship supported by federal legal 
authority. the promise of state and local strategies for integration, particularly because of 
local progressive resistance to enforcement, has given rise to an optimistic but romantic 
notion of local citizenship (ramakrishnan and colbern 2015, 10-13); (spiro 2009, 568-71). 
the concept is valuable as far as it goes, which is not as a substitute for national citizenship 
or belonging, but as a bridge to it. the practices of citizenship are certainly grounded at 
the local level, as the preceding discussion of integration policy presumes. the ultimate 
expression of local citizenship  voting rights in municipal elections  may be attainable 
in some jurisdictions (gilbert 2014), but it remains a limited form of participation, and 
an  impossible  one  for  those  who  lack  even  legal  immigrations  status.  the  citizenship 
status that can only be granted by the federal government, like legal status itself, will be 
indispensable to the long-term stability that promotes investment in the community and 
adaptation to the country. 

iii. cities and states
because  the  federal  government  controls  the  domain  of  immigration  law  and  policy, 
discussions  of  immigration  federalism  naturally  become  framed  by  the  dichotomy  that 
guides parts i and ii of this essay: the scope of federal law on the one hand and the limits 
of state and local power on the other. the central intergovernmental relationship in the 
formulation of enforcement policy, in particular, is of course the federal connection to the 
sub-federal. legal federalism debates thus revolve around understanding the vast scope of 
the ina and the extent to which the us code and the constitution leave localities with any 
authority to shape enforcement policy other than through carefully controlled cooperation 
with the federal government. 
but as happens in federalism debates generally, a singular focus on relations between the 
central government and the periphery obscures another vital intergovernmental dynamic 
in  immigration  federalism    the  relationship  between  states  and  their  subdivisions, 
especially their cities. the existence of thousands of local governments, and particularly 
of large urban centers that transcend their geography, has significant implications for the 
regulation of the populaces health, safety, and welfare. localities often operate according 

40   at the state level, california has undergone a shift that ought to be studied and understood, as a potential 
model for transformation. in the mid-1990s, it was the land of proposition 187 and the effort to exclude 
unauthorized immigrants from whatever state and local institutions were possible. voters also enacted an 
ideologically driven, counterproductive measure to prohibit the use of native language in english-language 
instruction in the public schools. but today, the state has taken the lead in doing everything within its power to 
provide security to unauthorized immigrants, both by resisting federal enforcement and providing affirmative 
tools of integration, and it even appears to be rethinking the native language ban (suro 2015).

532

journal on migration and human securityto their own politics while overseeing the institutions most vital to immigrant integration, 
such as schools and police forces. and the ideological diversity within states embodied in 
local governments further complicates and enriches the national debates over contentious 
issues that federalism helps structure (gerken 2014; bulman-pozen 2014).
across  the  country,  staunchly  republican  states  and  their  erstwhile  blue  cities  sharply 
diverge on some of the days most pressing socioeconomic concerns, including gun control 
and gun rights, civil rights for the lgbtq community, and immigration enforcement. and, 
of course, the dynamic works the other way, too, with democratic statehouses looking 
for means of ensuring that local agents tow their line. these increasingly pitched battles 
also reflect a more profound divergence in american life  between rural and exurban 
communities on the one hand, whose interests are magnified and often protected at the state 
level, and cities on the other, whose cosmopolitan ethos is driven by wealth, immigration, 
and economic productivity. indeed, the rural-urban split cuts across the country and the 
red and blue lines our national-level politics rely on to divide up the country. increasingly 
sophisticated accounts of american federalism thus break down the blue and red boxes of 
the states to study decentralization in all of its manifestations (gerken 2010; hills 2005). 
the once ancillary field of local government law has become central to federalism theory, 
if not constitutional law itself. 
in  our  constitutional  system,  states  have  the  formal  power,  and  cities  are  essentially 
creatures of state law. powerful and important cities can sometimes drive state policy by 
virtue of their sheer size and economic might. but the divergence in world views between 
many states and their cities is still leading the former to use their formal authority to enact 
laws to preempt the latter. for progressive movements that find their firmest footing in 
liberal  cities  within  conservative  states    think  houston, austin,  and  san antonio  in 
texas, and raleigh-durham and charlotte in north carolina  state preemption of local 
law represents a clear and present danger. and this dynamic matters a great deal generally, 
too, because states themselves are internally complex. state preemption of local law can 
succeed in flattening the ideological and policy diversity federalism produces. 
immigration federalism has long been marked by this state-city tension (rodriguez 2008, 
637-40). republican states have been responding for at least a decade to the noncooperation 
movement by preempting local sanctuary laws. texas senate bill 4 (sb 4), enacted in may 
of this year,41 builds on this practice, as do similar laws recently adopted in north carolina, 
georgia, and alabama. texas sb 4 introduces formal legal devices meant to coerce local 
police and governments into participating in federal immigration enforcement. sb 4 takes 
the predictable step of expressly preempting local laws or policies that prohibit officials 
from engaging or assisting in the enforcement of state and federal immigration laws, and 
it requires that law enforcement agencies honor ice detainer requests. but the law goes a 
novel step further and targets potentially noncompliant officials directly with legal jeopardy. 
the law defines failure to honor detainer requests as a misdemeanor, enumerating fines as 
high as $25,000 per offense (after a first offense). the law also creates a civil proceeding to 
remove elected officials who violate the laws provisions.42

41   tex. s.b.4, 85th leg., (2017). 
42   the law does carve out a number of local institutions from its reach, including hospitals, peace officers 
working at religious institutions, school districts, public health departments, community centers, or mental 
health authorities. see sb 4, section 752.052, subsections (a)-(f).

533

enforcement, integration, and the future of immigration federalismas with the higher-level, federal-state debate, these sorts of laws can be analyzed legally or 
as a matter of politics and policy. legally speaking, it is a familiar tenet of local government 
law  that  cities  can  exercise  power  only  within  the  legal  frameworks  that  others  have 
created for them (frug and barron 2006, 1). the us constitution does not protect cities 
from  state  interference  in  the  way  it  protects  states  (and  its  subdivisions)  from  federal 
commandeering  or  displacement.  the  commandeering  doctrine,  which  can  provide  a 
bulwark for enforcement skeptics at the local level against the federal government, applies 
when the federal government has dragooned states or localities into the implementation 
or enforcement of federal law. the doctrine embodies the balance the constitution strikes 
between  the  central  government  and  the  states.  but  the  principle  does  not  apply  when 
the federal government is absent from the equation. to be sure, cities may have state law 
claims against preemption statutes or other state measures that interfere with local policy 
making  or  governing  structure,43  and  some  local  government  scholars  argue  that  cities 
ought to have a place within the us constitutional firmament. but the basic principle that 
localities amount to creatures of state law gives states wide-ranging coercive authority over 
its subdivisions.
in fact, there are strategic reasons to remain wary of devising structural claims to prevent 
states  from  disabling  their  subdivisions,  for  the  same  reason  that  preemption  works  as 
a  double-edged  sword  in  federal-state  relations.  fights  over  constitutional  structure 
frequently if poorly mask deeper disagreements about policy. one could certainly take a 
principled, across-the-board, localist position, on the theory that local policies are easiest 
to change or best reflect our ideological diversity in its many manifestations. but it can be 
risky to develop structural claims in highly charged settings such as immigration policy, 
where those advancing the novel legal claims really have an underlying agenda. cities 
(especially large ones) in the main tend to support the progressive agenda, especially when 
it comes to immigration, because of their cosmopolitan and immigrant identities. but states 
can also be enforcement skeptics. the california model discussed above reflects precisely 
that, and the state legislature has relied on preemption as a tool to promotes its vision of 
state integration policy.44
but even though states have considerable power over their cities, they cannot regulate their 
subdivisions in ways that would violate federal law or the us constitution, or require their 
subdivisions to do what would otherwise be legally prohibited. based on this principle, in 
confronting sb 4, a good lawyer would thus ask whether federal law or the constitution 
prohibits anything about the texas law. 
because the ina defines and effectively captures the field of immigration enforcement, 
there is always the possibility that a state enforcement law will run into conflict with it. but 

43   see, e.g., state building and construction trades council of cal. v. city of vista, 54 cal.4th 547, 555-
557 (s. ct. cal. 2012) (striking down application of state prevailing wage law to contracts entered into by 
local jurisdiction and discussing home rule doctrine that permits cities to govern themselves free of state 
legislative intrusion, as to those matters deemed municipal affairs but does not insulate them from state laws 
that address matters of statewide concern).
44   the state legislature enacted a law preempting localities from adopting housing ordinances that penalized 
landlords for renting to unauthorized immigrants, responding to the emergence in the late 2000s of these sorts 
of ordinances at the local level in various parts of the country. see 2007 cal. assem. bill 976, 2007-2008 
reg. sess. (2007). 

534

journal on migration and human securitybecause federal law contemplates localities offering their cooperation with federal law, a 
state law that requires local entities to respond to detainer requests, which are themselves 
requests  for  cooperation,  seems  to  re-enforce  the  ina.  perhaps  a  hypothetical  state 
requirement that localities enter into 287(g) agreements would create tension with an ina 
that contemplates leaving that choice to the local sheriffs and police departments, on the 
theory that law enforcement officials are the appropriate local entities to decide whether to 
actively enforce immigration law. but because local authority stems from state authority, 
it would be hard to muster a claim that the state cannot stand in for its own subdivision in 
making that choice, in the absence of a state law basis to ground that claim.
constitutional rights provisions might also limit certain types of state preemption laws, 
including sb 4. in the case of the anti-anti-cooperation laws, the most viable claim would 
be the fourth amendment one, which local enforcement skeptics could use against either 
the federal or the state government. to the extent honoring a federal detainer request would 
violate the fourth amendment, the state cannot require its police departments to violate the 
constitution. the limit of this approach is that it makes challenging state laws facially, or 
in their entirety, difficult. fourth amendment claims tend to be fact-specific. but perhaps 
the very complexity of sorting out which detainers can be honored and which risk fourth 
amendment liability provides a strong legal policy argument against the adoption of a 
sweeping pro-detainer law, to insure localities from legal liability and act as a prophylactic 
against predictable fourth amendment violations. 
slightly  further  afield,  equal  protection  claims  against  anti-sanctuary  laws  might  be 
devised, to the extent local noncooperation laws can be framed as attempts to insulate 
noncitizens or particular racial groups from animus and discrimination. preemption laws 
that withdraw such protections might be manifestations of animus against noncitizens.45 
unlike the fourth amendment theory, this legal critique of the likes of sb 4 has not been 
tested to date; the primary purpose of most anti-detainer laws is to promote good policing, 
not to prevent discrimination, and states like texas could well justify their own preemption 
laws by pointing to the importance of enforcing federal immigration law. but regardless of 
its likelihood of success, this approach to legal strategy at least has the benefit of expressing 
substantive reasons for opposing the state law.
the limits of these legal claims against state laws like sb 4 underscore the surpassing 
importance of a feature of immigration federalism also relevant in the federal-local debate 
 the need to build a politics around these issues. litigation can certainly be a part of 
that strategy. even unsuccessful legal arguments can play a vital role in deepening these 
political claims, and lawsuits can help write a narrative about immigration, policing, and 
the local community to counter the states. by drawing attention through litigation to the 
sheer breadth of the states attempt to control its localities, litigation can draw political 
support and other resources to a fight worth having as part of the broader immigration 
enforcement debate. but cities are unlikely to be able to protect themselves, or advance the 
interests of their noncitizen residents, with legal arguments alone.

45   romer v. evans, 517 u.s. 620 (1996) (striking down amendment to colorado constitution that prohibited 
localities from adopting nondiscrimination ordinances to protect gays and lesbians, on the ground that the 
amendment reflected bias or animus on the basis of sexual orientation, in violation of the equal protection 
clause).

535

enforcement, integration, and the future of immigration federalismanother legal political-strategy would have the federal government come in on the side of 
localities in some way. some scholars have raised the prospect that congress or the federal 
government might take steps to protect cities from state preemption through congressional 
preemption (davidson 2007), or at least give states incentives to permit their cities room 
for maneuver, including by providing funding for integration programs (rodriguez 2008, 
637)  long a source of concern for states with large immigrant populations. but whether a 
federal-local partnership is either viable or a good idea depends less on theories of optimal 
intergovernmental  arrangements  than  on  ones  views  about  the  politics  of  immigrant 
integration.
the state-local divide ultimately helps highlight how fundamentally contingent political 
structure questions can be. the intergovernmental relationship we might prefer will depend 
both on our substantive immigration preference and on the policies each level of government 
might pursue at any given moment in time. but regardless of substantive preferences, the 
very fact that intergovernmentalism encompasses a multiplicity of arrangements means 
that a federalism strategy must be attentive to the full range of intergovernmental relations. 
laws  such  as  sb  4  re-enforce  a  vigorous  enforcement  agenda  and  help  quash  locally 
supported  movements  toward  humane  enforcement,  or  even  non-enforcement. as  with 
integration policy, an exclusive focus on what emanates from the center therefore obscures 
many of the sites in which our immigration policies and the corresponding politics take 
shape.

conclusion
despite its control over the terms of immigration law and the vast administrative apparatus 
created to enforce it, the federal government cannot escape the push and pull dynamics 
generated by federalism. in an arena as ideologically contested as immigration policy, it 
should come as no surprise that our federal system will produce divergent policies and 
regular challenges to whatever might be the federal governments reigning conception of 
immigration policy. the intergovernmental disputes and dependencies that can arise in a 
federal system are most apparent and complex when it comes to enforcement policy and the 
federal governments relationship to states, cities, and their law enforcement bureaucracies. 
but they are also increasingly salient in the relationships between states and their cities, 
which are often at odds about the place of immigrants in our societies. to a less pointed 
extent, federalism also structures the processes of immigrant integration, separate and apart 
from debates over how vigorously to pursue deportation, though the latter intimately affects 
the former, too. the intractability of the immigration policy questions that animate these 
federalism  dynamics  is  perhaps  the  best  argument  for  sustaining  an  intergovernmental 
framework  for  immigration,  whether  enforcement  or  integration  is  at  stake.  and  yet, 
perhaps  the  most  contested  matter  within  immigration  federalism    the  proper  social 
status of those without legal status  can only be truly resolved through decisive federal 
action. whether our immigration federalism and the legal and policy diversity it entails 
can eventually prompt a humane and lasting resolution to that question remains to be seen.

536

journal on migration and human securityreferences

archibold, randal c. 2010. arizona enacts stringent law on immigration. new york 
times, april 23. http://www.nytimes.com/2010/04/24/us/politics/24immig.html?_
r=0.

bulman-pozen, jessica. 2014. partisan federalism. harvard law review 127(4): 1077-

46.

coonan,  terry.  2013.  when  perception  is  reality:  287(g)    a  solution  in  search 
of  a  problem.  criminology  and  public  policy  12(2):  283-94.  https://doi.
org/10.1111/1745-9133.12036. 

cox, adam b., and thomas miles. 2017. legitimacy and cooperation: will immigrants 
cooperate with local police who enforce federal immigration law? new york 
university working paper. new york: new york university school of law. https://
papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2658265.

cox,  adam  b.,  and  cristina  rodriguez.  2015.  the  president  and  immigration  law 

redux. yale law journal 125(6): 104-225.

davidson, nestor. 2007. cooperative localism: federal-local collaboration in an era of 

state sovereignty. virginia law review 93(4): 960-1034.

de graauw, els, and irene bloemraad. 2017. working together: building successful policy 
and program partnerships for immigrant integration. journal on migration and 
human security 5(1): 105-23. https://doi.org/10.14240/jmhs.v5i1.76. 

dhs  (us  department  of  homeland  security).  2012.  guidance  on  state  and  local 
governments  assistance  in  immigration  enforcement  and  related  matters. 
washington,  dc:  dhs.    https://www.dhs.gov/publication/guidance-state-and-
local-governments-assistance-immigration-enforcement-and-related. 

fenton,  justin.  2017.  baltimore  prosecutors  told  to  consider  consequences  for 
prosecuting  illegal  immigrants  for  minor  crimes.  baltimore  sun,  april  28. 
http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/maryland/crime/bs-md-ci-states-attorney-
immigrants-20170428-story.html.

frug, gerald, and david barron. 2006. international local government law. the urban 

lawyer 38(1): 1-62.

gao (us government accountability office). 2011. u.s. citizenship and immigration 
services could better assess its grant program. washington, dc: gao. http://
www.gao.gov/products/gao-12-274.

gerken, heather k. 2010. federalism all the way down. harvard law review 124(1): 

1-74.

.  2014.  federalism  as  the  new  nationalism: an  overview.  yale  law  journal 

123(6): 1626-2133.

537

enforcement, integration, and the future of immigration federalismgilbert,  lauren.  2014.  reconceiving  citizenship:  noncitizen  voting  in  new  york 
city  municipal  elections  as  a  case  study  in  immigrant  integration  and  local 
governance. journal on migration and human security 2(3): 223-50. https://doi.
org/10.14240/jmhs.v2i3.33.

gulasekaram, pratheepan, and karthick ramakrishnan. 2013. immigration federalism: a 

reappraisal. new york university law review 88(6): 2074-145.

guttentag,  lucas.  2013.  the  forgotten  equality  norm  in  immigration  preemption: 
discrimination,  harassment,  and  the  civil  rights act  of  1870.  duke  journal 
of  constitutional  law  &  public  policy  8(2):  1-52.  https://doi.org/10.2139/
ssrn.2339424. 

henderson,  tim.  2014.  more  jurisdictions  defying  feds  on  deporting  immigrants. 
philadelphia: the  pew  charitable trusts.  http://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-
and-analysis/blogs/stateline/2014/10/31/more-jurisdictions-defying-feds-on-
deporting-immigrants.

hills, roderick. 2005. is federalism good for localism? the localist case for federal 

regimes. journal of law & politics 21: 187-221.

horowitz, michael e. 2016. department of justice referral of allegations of potential 
violations  of  8  u.s.c.    1373  by  grant  recipients.  memorandum,  may  31. 
washington, dc: doj. https://oig.justice.gov/reports/2016/1607.pdf.

ice  (us  immigration  and  customs  enforcement).  2014.  delegation  of  immigration 
authority  section  287(g)  immigration  and  nationality act.  washington,  dc: 
ice. https://www.ice.gov/factsheets/287g. 

johnson, jeh. 2014. secure communities. memorandum, november 20. washington, 
dc:  dhs.  https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/14_1120_memo_
secure_communities.pdf.

kalhan, anil. 2013. immigration policing and federalism through the lens of technology, 

surveillance, and privacy. ohio state law journal 74(6): 1105-1165.

kelly, john. 2017. enforcement of the immigration laws to serve the national interest. 
memorandum,  february  20.  washington,  dc:  dhs.  https://www.dhs.gov/sites/
default/files/publications/17_0220_s1_enforcement-of-the-immigration-laws-
to-serve-the-national-interest.pdf.

martin, david a. 2012. reading arizona. virginia law review, in brief 98(1): 112-20. 

https://ssrn.com/abstract=2111510. 

meissner, doris, and donald m. kerwin. 2009. dhs and immigration: taking stock and 
correcting  course.  washington,  dc:  migration  policy  institute.  http://www.
migrationpolicy.org/research/dhs-and-immigration-taking-stock-and-correcting-
course.

538

journal on migration and human securitymotomura, hiroshi. 2011. the discretion that matters: federal immigration enforcement, 
state and local arrests, and the civil-criminal line. ucla law review 58(6): 
1819-58.

ncsl (national conference of state legislatures). 2015. report on 2014 state immigration 
laws. washington, dc: ncsl. http://www.ncsl.org/research/immigration/2014-
immigration-report.aspx.

. 2016. report on 2015 state immigration laws. washington, dc: ncsl. http://
www.ncsl.org/research/immigration/report-on-2015-state-immigration-laws.aspx.
pew charitable trusts. 2014. immigration and legalization: roles and responsibilities 
of  states  and  localities.  philadelphia:  pew  charitable  trusts.  http://
www.pewtrusts.org/~/media/legacy/uploadedfiles/pcs_assets/2014/
immigrationandlegalizationreport2014pdf.pdf. 

ramakrishnan, s. karthick, and allan colbern. 2015. the california package: immigrant 
integration  and  the  evolving  nature  of  state  citizenship.  policy  matters  6(3): 
1-19.  http://policymatters.ucr.edu/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/pmatters-vol6-3-
state-citizenship.pdf.

rodriguez, cristina. 2008. the significance of the local in immigration regulation. 

michigan law review 106(4): 567-642.

. 2011. the integrated regime of immigration regulation. in writing immigration: 
scholars  and  journalists  in  dialogue,  edited  by  roberto  suro  and  marcelo 
suarez-orozco, 44-61. berkeley, ca: university of california press. https://doi.
org/10.1525/california/9780520267176.003.0003.  

. 2015. toward dtente in immigration federalism. journal of law & politics 

30(3): 505-26.

rosenblum, marc, and doris meissner. 2014. the deportation dilemma: reconciling 
tough and humane enforcement. washington, dc: migration policy institute. 
http://www.migrationpolicy.org/research/deportation-dilemma-reconciling-tough-
humane-enforcement.

salyer, lucy. 1995. law as harsh as tigers: chinese immigrants and the shaping of modern 
american immigration law. chapel hill, nc: university of north carolina press.
schuck,  peter.  2013.  immigrant  criminals  in  overcrowded  prisons:  rethinking  an 

anachronistic policy. georgetown immigration law journal 27: 597-661.

spiro, peter. 2009. formalizing local citizenship. fordham urban law journal 37(2): 

559-72. 

suro, roberto. 2015. california dreaming: the new dynamism in immigration federalism 
and opportunities for inclusion on a variegated landscape. journal on migration 
and human security 3(1): 1-25. https://doi.org/10.14240/jmhs.v3i1.41. 

539

enforcement, integration, and the future of immigration federalismtareen,  sophia.  gov.  rauners  immigration  message  leaves  advocates  perplexed. 
chicago tribune, march 22. http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/local/breaking/
chi-bruce-rauner-immigration-illinois-20150322-story.html.

vock, daniel c. 2013. capping string of victories for immigrants, brown signs california 
trust act. philadelphia: the pew charitable trusts. http://www.pewtrusts.org/en/
research-and-analysis/blogs/stateline/2013/10/07/capping-string-of-victories-for-
immigrants-brown-signs-california-trust-act.

540

journal on migration and human security