reconfiguring the law of non-
refoulement: procedural and 
substantive barriers for those 
seeking to access surrogate 
international human rights 
protection

mark r. von sternberg 
catholic charities community services, archdiocese of new york

executive summary
both  geographic  and  normative  constraints  restrict  access  to  surrogate 
international  human  rights  protection  for  those  seeking  a  haven  from 
serious human rights abuses. primary among territorial restrictions has 
been the fall-out from the us supreme courts decision in sale v. haitian 
council  centers  in  which  the  court  explicitly  ruled  that  nothing  in  us 
statutory law, or in the 1951 convention on refugees or its 1967 protocol, 
precluded  the  interdiction  of  haitian  refugees  in  international  waters 
and their return to the country of origin without an effective interview on 
their protection clams. this ruling is in transparent contradiction to the 
general  international  law  norm  of  non-refoulement  according  to  modern 
scholarship and emerging case law. this paper concludes that sale should 
be overturned by statute as should related pre-screening practices. a new 
standard  of  jurisdiction  should  be  adopted  which  does  not  depend  on 
territorial access to a signatory state but on whether the state is exercising 
power  in  fact.  similar  concerns  exist  with  respect  to  safe  third  country 
agreements which often offend the international customary right of the 
asylum seeker to choose where his or her claim will be filed. this paper 
argues that the right of choice should be recognized and onward travel and 
admission to the country of destination allowed. this result is especially 
called for where return of the alien by the country of first contact raises 
serious concerns under the law of non-refoulement. imbalances noted in 
this paper include those generated by the new terrorism related grounds of 
inadmissibility in the united states and the summary denial of childrens 
asylum claims flowing from gang violence. 
other questions are raised in this paper concerning work authorization 
and detention of asylum seekers. access to an employment authorization 

 2014 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 2 number 4 (2014): 329-360document for those filing colorable claims should be recognized by statute 
to render us practice consistent with that of most other states. release 
from detention, on the other hand, for asylum seekers has now been broadly 
recognized by the us department of homeland security where the asylum 
seekers identity can be ascertained and the claim is non-frivolous in nature. 
this approach is largely consistent with international law, although there 
have been unnecessary delays in implementing it. 
on the substantive law, the international customary norm of non-refoulment 
has been expanded considerably through the development of opinio juris 
by scholars and the practice of states. this paper traces efforts in europe 
to develop a law of temporary refuge for those fleeing civil war situations 
characterized by humanitarian law violations. similarly, case law under 
the european convention of human rights has now come to focus on the 
harm the claimant would suffer as the result of conditions in the country 
of  origin  without  identifying  an  explicit  agent  of  serious  harm.  related 
to these developments has been the notion of complementary protection 
under which relief can be conferred where the alien would suffer serious 
harm  upon  return  to  the  home  state  but  not  for  a  convention  reason. 
these  approaches  have  now  received  approval  in  the  european  union 
asylum qualification directive so that international protection may now 
be conferred either because the alien would suffer serious harm on account 
of  the  intensity  of  human  rights  violations  taking  place  in  the  country 
of  origin,  or  those  conditions,  taken  in  conjunction  with  the  claimants 
personal situation, support a finding that the claimant would be impacted. 
this paper argues that this latter standard has now been made a part of 
the customary norm of non-refoulement and that it should be recognized 
by statute as a basis for non-return and coupled with status where the 
new standard can be met. such a measure would help restore the nations 
commitment to human rights and humanitarian concerns.

introduction
several major problems face the individual in need of international human rights protection. 
the first of these is whether he or she can access some state system wherein the claimant 
can be granted relief. another is whether that state system will recognize the claimant as 
a refugee or as someone upon whom it can confer some form of surrogate international 
human rights protection. this paper attempts to discuss two major areas of concern which 
affect the dilemma of refugee flight and the search for durable solutions. 
the first of these is examination of the procedural bars to seeking asylum and other forms 
of refugee protection as manifested in interdiction on the high seas and safe third country 
agreements (together with other ancillary restrictions on refugees including detention and 
filing requirements). the second entails a review of state substantive standards governing 
eligibility  for  protection  and  the  conformity  of  those  standards  (or  the  lack  thereof)  to 
the international norm of non-refoulement. primarily, the paper will look to united states 

330

journal on migration and human securitypractices  in  relationship  to  international  requirements  as  a  template  for  purposes  of 
developing its comparative model.

part a: geographic scope of the law of non-refoulement

i. prefatory remarks

whatever  broad  discretion  the  sovereign  may  have  over  migration  in  general,  that 
discretion is sharply delimited in the crucial area of human displacement and the related 
phenomenon of forced migration. for here, the sovereigns power clashes with treaty law 
and with the international customary norm of non-refoulement. under customary law as 
codified in article 33 of the refugee convention of 1951, a refugee may not be returned 
to the frontiers of a state wherein her life or freedom would be threatened by reason of 
race, religion, nationality, membership in a social group or political opinion.1 similarly, 
customary law and article 3 of the convention against torture also preclude the return of 
any person to a state wherein there are good reasons to believe that that individual would 
be subject to torture.2 
a question of some immediacy, therefore, is: when does the obligation to refrain from 
refoulement crystallize? there is some dispute about this as the sale case (discussed below) 
attests. the most encompassing (and, in this authors consideration, the correct) view is 
that advanced by guy goodwin-gill: state responsibility is engaged wherever state action 
takes place and irrespective of physical location. hence, 

[t]he principle of non-refoulement has crystallized into a rule of customary law, the 
core element of which is prohibition of return in any manner whatsoever of refugees 
to  countries  where  they  may  face  persecution.  the  scope  and  application  of  the 
[customary] rule are determined by [its] essential purpose, thus regulating state action 
wherever it takes place, whether internally, at the border or through its agents outside 
territorial jurisdiction. (goodwin-gill 1996, 143) [emphasis in original]

a more conservative view is that the obligation of non-refoulement becomes engaged when 
a noncitizen reaches an international frontier. under this view, [t]oday, there appears to 
be  ample  support  for  the  conclusion  that article  33(1)  is  applicable  to  rejection  at  the 
frontier of a potential host state (noll 2005, 542, 549). non-rejection, in turn, however, 
implies limited admission, at least for the purpose of determining whether the noncitizen 

1   convention relating to the status of refugees, signed 28 july 1951, entered into force 22 april, 1954, 189 
unts 150, art. 33(1). on the customary law aspects of the treaty provision, see generally goodwin-gill and 
mcadam 2007. the bar is both a rule of customary law and a rule of jus cogens, thus enjoying universality 
and non-derogability. see generally, parker and neylon 1989. in this respect, jus cogens describes norms 
which have risen to the apex of international customary law so that they are said to have acquired the features 
of universality and non-derogability. id. 
2    see,  convention  against  torture  and  other  cruel,  inhuman  or  degrading  punishment,  adopted  10 
december 1984, entered into force 26 june 1987, g.a. res. 39/46, 39 un gaor supp. (no. 51), un doc. 
a/39/51, at 197 (1984), reprinted in 23 ilm 1027 (1984), minor changes reprinted in 24 ilm 535 (1985), 
5 hrlj 350 (1984) [convention against torture or cat], art. 3. on the customary law underpinnings of 
article 3 of the convention against torture, see, rosati 1997. 

331

reconfiguring the law of non-refoulementis a refugee (or reasonably fears the imposition of torture), and so for ascertaining the full 
scope of the host states obligations vis--vis the individual under consideration.3
what does non-refoulement as a threshold matter require? under non-refoulement, states 
have a responsibility (a) to avoid returning aliens to a state wherein it is reasonably clear 
that the alien will be persecuted or tortured; and (b) to avoid sending the alien to a state 
which does not itself observe the norm of non-refoulement (noll 2005, 549). as a subsidiary 
obligation of these two major injunctions, states also have a responsibility to refrain from 
sending  an  alien  who  presents  himself  at  the  border  anywhere  before  conducting  an 
interview as to whether the alien has a prospect of persecution or torture.4 a state which 
summarily returns an alien to any state under the circumstances described above engages 
in the prohibited activity of rejection at the frontier.5

ii. interdiction at sea and in-country processing by officers of the 

asylum state
with respect to interdiction at sea, it was long believed that the practice of picking up 
asylum seekers at sea and returning them to their home states without a hearing was patently 
illegal under general international law. at a minimum, it was maintained, such individuals 
were required to receive a hearing on persecution and torture (a screening interview) 
before being forcibly repatriated.  indeed, prior to a mass influx of haitians resulting from 
the overthrow of president jean bertrand aristide in the early nineties, it had been the 
practice of us cutters patrolling the caribbean to provide such interviews (goodwin-gill 
and mcadam 2007, 146-50).
in 1993, however, the us supreme court issued its decision in sale v. haitian centers 
council, inc.6 in that case, the court upheld the current interdiction policy in which the 
coast guard, feeling that it would have to admit substantial numbers of haitians to us 
territory  if  the  interviews  were  to  be  continued,  resolved  to  repatriate  fleeing  haitians 
without any dialogue with them as to what would happen once they were forced back. 
looking at this practice, the court reasoned that the term return in the statute, like the 

3   perhaps the most interesting evidence of this principle can be found in the united nations high commissioner 
for refugees (unhcr) executive conclusion xxxii, protection of asylum seekers in situations of large-
scale influx. according to the unhcr conclusion, arriving asylum seekers are to be admitted to the country 
in which they first seek refuge. if that state is unable to admit them on a durable basis, it should admit them 
on a temporary basis and given the following protections. such asylum seekers (1) should not be penalized 
nor have their movements restricted solely on the ground that their presence in the country is considered 
unlawful; (2) should enjoy the full enjoyment of civil rights guaranteed under the universal declaration of 
human rights; and (3) should receive all the necessities of life. in all cases, the norm of non-refoulement and 
the bar against rejection at the frontier must be scrupulously observed. unhcr executive committee of 
the high commissioners programme, protection of asylum-seekers in situations of large-scale influx, 21 
october 1981, no. 22 (xxxii), available at: http://www.refworld.org/docid/3ae68c6e10.html. 
4   note on non-refoulement (submitted by the high commissioner) ec/scp/2, international protection 
(scip), 23 august 1977,  7. executive committee of the high commissioners programme, 28th session of 
the sub-committee of the whole on international protection, available at: http://www.unhcr.org/3ae68ccd10.
html.
5   id. 
6   509 us 155 (1993). 

332

journal on migration and human securityword refouler in article 33 of the convention, was the practical equivalent of the term 
deport. accordingly, a state was precluded from returning aliens in such circumstances 
only where the alien had in actual fact presented herself at the frontiers of a signatory state. 
it was only in the context of removal from the territory of the refouling state that the bar 
against refoulement could come into effect. 
the criticism of the us supreme court as the result of this ruling was considerable. one 
celebrated editorial by goodwin-gill, appearing in the international journal of refugee 
law, noted that the only legal effect of the courts decision was that it had added itself to the 
list of violators (1993, 461). the majoritys misunderstanding of the french verb refouler 
(which means to drive back in english) was complete and unqualified. what is of moment 
under international law was not the place the asylum seeker was being driven from (here 
the high seas), but rather where he or she was being driven to (in many instances, relatively 
certain persecution). as noted previously, the refugee convention must be interpreted so 
as to give effect to its overriding objective, i.e., to prevent refugees from being exposed to 
persecution. it is difficult if not impossible to reconcile this purpose with the interpretation 
given by the us supreme court to the scope of article 33 in the sale case.
on may 20, 2004, the inter-american commission on human rights ruled that haitians 
interdicted on the high seas by the united states were entitled to fair hearings on their claim 
to refugee status, concluding that this was a protected right under the american declaration 
on the rights and duties of man.7 the commission also directed the us government to 
provide reports on haitian asylum seekers interdicted in international waters, which are to 
include the number of those interdicted who have made refugee claims and the conditions 
under which those claims were heard.8
the damage done by the sale decision is difficult to assess. one of its chief effects was to 
create a legal black hole with respect to interdiction on the high seas where there was, 
according to the court, no law, and hence refugees could have no rights. the vestiges of 
sale are still being clung to by major jurisdictions such as australia which continues to 
participate in interdiction and removal programs (mcadam 2013, 435). what remains of 
interest, however, is that the court would not repeat with guantanamo detainees the mistake 
it had made in sale: in the boumediene case the court ruled that the writ of habeas corpus 
extended to those detained on the guantanamo naval base, rejecting arguments that federal 
courts lacked jurisdiction because us territorial sovereignty was not involved.9
in boumediene, the court arguably overturned the two principal barriers affecting noncitizens 
seeking relief in us courts: alienage and extraterritoriality. it had long been accepted in 
us jurisprudence that habeas jurisdiction would not extend to aliens seeking to invoke us 
constitutional  protections  in  an  extraterritorial  setting  (legomsky  and  rodriguez  2009, 
169-71). 
the  court  had  originally  rejected  these  restrictions  in  rasul  v.  bush,10  with  respect  to 
7   inter-american commission on human rights, report no. 51/96, decision of the commission as to the 
merits of case 10, 675 (march 13, 1997), available at: http://www.cidh.org/annualrep/96eng/usa10675.
htm.
8   id. 
9   boumediene v. bush, 553 us 723 (2008). 
10   542 us 466 (2004). 

333

reconfiguring the law of non-refoulementstatutory habeas. by the time boumediene was decided, however, the habeas statute had 
been modified so as to preclude jurisdiction over the guantanamo detainees in us district 
courts. relying on constitutional habeas, therefore, boumediene enshrines the essential 
principle spawned in rasul: the us has retained practical sovereignty over guantanamo 
by virtue of its de facto control there and its exercise of actual power over all matters 
having to do with the naval base.11 
following rasul, the boumediene court determined, in effect, that the issue of jurisdiction 
should  be  based  on  a  practical  inquiry  into  whether  the  united  states  was  exercising 
unrestricted power over the guantanamo base rather than a formal inquiry into territorial 
sovereignty. 
sonia farber has explained how this essentially new judicial outlook affects refugees, both 
those  detained  at  guantanamo  and  those  found  in  other  extraterritorial settings  (2010). 
primarily she explores the situation of refugees detained at guantanamo, but explains that 
the courts decision should extend to other refugees as well. her examination of the issues 
illustrates  convincingly  how  the  court  has  now  effectively  abandoned  the  legal  black 
hole theory it had pursued in sale pursuant to which refugees have no extraterritorial 
rights because there is no substantive law to which they can turn for protection. 
a related practice is pre-clearance.  pre-clearance has been adopted by certain states in 
an effort to block asylum seekers attempting to leave a country of claimed persecution from 
accessing the territory of the former. in regina (ex parte european roma rights center) 
v. immigration officer at prague airport and another,12 the house of lords was asked 
to review a practice under which british officials temporarily stationed at prague airport 
denied access to uk-bound aircraft (and thus to britain) of czech members of the roma 
ethnic group where it was the purpose of the latter to seek asylum in the united kingdom. 
the lords were careful to distinguish the regina case from sale. in this case, the individual 
seeking protection had not reached an international frontier, the threshold requirement for 
those who would meet the convention refugee definition. the term non-refoulement can 
have no logical application, the lords ruled, if the asylum seeker remains inside the country 
of claimed persecution for, in that instance, there is nowhere to return him to; unfortunate 
though his plight may be, the putative refugee remains inside the country wherein his human 
rights are being abused. the lords notwithstanding struck down the arrangement based on 
application of article 14 of european convention on human rights (echr) (precluding 
discrimination): by targeting only roma for removal from uk-bound flights, great britain 
had violated the affected passengers right to equal treatment under the echr.
a  compelling  brief  submitted  by  the  united  nations  high  commissioner  for  human 
rights (unhcr) takes issue with the conclusion that refugee law was not implicated by 
the pre-clearing practice.13 the unhcr position is that a state which obstructs the passage 
11   during oral argument in rasul, this principle was best illustrated by the revelation that an envelope 
would not get off the base unless it had a us stamp on it. the rasul court turned for its approach to some 
very pedigreed jurisprudence established through lord mansfields rulings to the effect that the writ follows 
dominion or power exercised by the crown outside of the realm. rasul, citing king v. cowle, 2 burr 85497 
eng. rep. 587 (k.b. 1759); ex parte muwenya [1960] 1 q.b. 241 (c.a.), through lord evershed). 
12   [2004] ukhl 2004, reprinted in (2005) international journal of refugee law 17: 217.
13   unhcr, r (ex parte european human rights center et al.) v. immigration officer at prague airport 

334

journal on migration and human securityof refugees must do so within the law. in this respect, pre-clearance within the state of 
claimed persecution is the practical equivalent of rejection at the frontier. as noted by the 
us delegate to the 1951 plenipotentiary conference, louis henkin, rejection at the frontier 
can take a variety of forms, including closing the border. the practical consequence of 
what was done at the prague airport was to close the uk border to roma asylum seekers.14
the  result  contended  for  in  the  unhcr  brief  has  obvious  parallels  in  the  position  of 
goodwin-gill set forth earlier that the state may act through its agents outside its territorial 
jurisdiction and that this is enough to engage state responsibility. apart from this, states may 
not exercise such rights as they do have in bad faith. such exercise would be tantamount 
to an abus de droit. the unhcr position is not to the effect that uk officials must admit 
every czech national who presents herself for admission; rather, examination must be made 
to determine whether the applicant is a refugee, and, if so, admission must be permitted on 
a temporary basis.15
in hirsi v. italy, the european court of human rights adopted legal positions which were 
comparable to those the unhcr had been advancing in the prague airport case and which 
had been articulated earlier by goodwin-gill in his editorial on sale.16  in hirsi, the court 
was asked to resolve italys removal of somali and eritrean refugees to libya without 
any kind of examination with respect to the latters well-founded fear of persecution or 
other significant harm. the strasbourg court held that this practice violated both the non-
refoulement provisions of article 3 of the echr and constituted a collective expulsion in 
contravention of article 4 of protocol 4 to the echr. 
on the violation of article 3, the court found that it would not measure whether the state 
engaged in returning the refugees to libya had territorial jurisdiction over them, as had 
the supreme court in sale. rather, it examined whether italy exercised power in fact over 
the claimants in determining if the norm of non-refoulement had been violated.17 on the 
collective expulsion violation, the court adopted an argument which had been put forward 
in the prague airport case. the court ruled that collectively removing these claimants to 
libya without an interview would frustrate the fundamental aim of the treaty by precluding 
them altogether from reaching a forum where they could apply for some form of surrogate 
international human rights protection.18 although neither the 1951 refugee convention, 
nor  the  echr  guarantee  a  refugee  claimant  a  forum  in  which  to  advance  his  or  her 
application, these instruments contemplate that at some juncture such a forum must exist 
for the right to non-refoulement to be meaningful. adopting procedural mechanisms which 
would effectively preempt the right of non-return violates the instruments in the same way 
that rejecting the claimant at the border would. 

and another (unhcr intervening), (2005) international journal of refugee law 17: 425. 
14   id.
15   id.
16   hirsi jamaa and others v. italy, ect.hr judgment of feb. 23, 2012 [grand chamber], no. 39473/98, 
available 
http://www.asylumlawdatabase.eu/en/content/ecthr-hirsi-jamaa-and-others-v-italy-gc 
-application-no-2776509. see also, den heijer 2013, 265. 
17   hirsi case, supra, at 66.
18   id. at 76-78 (holding that italys actions violated the principle of non-refoulement and stating that italy 
must grant the applicants an opportunity to obtain asylum in italy). see also, den heijer 2013, 280-85.

at: 

335

reconfiguring the law of non-refoulementthe hirsi case is illustrative of modern trends in a number of respects. in the first place, it 
recognizes the existence under customary law of a norm of both direct and indirect non-
refoulement (i.e., return to libya where inhuman treatment might be imposed, plus the 
risk that libya, through its own violation of the norm of non-refoulement, would return 
refugees to eritrea and somalia where they would incur risk of persecution). in addition, 
and of equal importance, it was of no moment for the tribunal that those being returned by 
italy to libya had not requested asylum or any other form of surrogate international human 
rights protection. it was not, the court ruled, for the returnees to advance their claims for 
protection; it was for the repatriating state to determine whether any of those it was sending 
back would be subject to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment upon return.19

iii. burden sharing and safe third country agreements

safe  third  country  agreements  now  constitute  one  of  the  most  effective  barriers  to 
international human rights protection today. such agreements are fundamentally undesirable 
in principle in that they offend the received doctrine that the asylum seeker should have 
his or her choice as to where to file. this principle obtains in part because of the differing 
positions of states on the application of international criteria to international protection 
claims.20 unhcr has provided guidance with respect to where an asylum seeker should 
apply for refuge. unhcr has determined:

[a]n examination of the internationally accepted principles relating to asylum reveals 
that none of them suggest much less prescribethat the right to seek asylum has to 
be exercised in any particular country, or that a person who has been forced to escape 
his country to save his life or freedom would forfeit his right to seek asylum if he does 
not exercise it in the first country whose territory he has entered.21

despite this clear statement of policy, it remains the continuing trend to restrict the asylum 
seekers options, such as in the case of the us-canada safe third country agreement, 
which is discussed in detail below. unhcr has spoken out specifically on the international 
law implications of the us-canada agreement. among other things, it has remarked that 
any agreement should reflect the principle that the wishes of the asylum seeker as to which 
state to seek refuge in should be taken into account as far as possible. unhcr also 
has maintained that asylum should not be denied on the sole ground that it could have 
been sought in another state.22 unhcr observes that there are broad bars existing under 
both canadian and us refugee law, noting that some of these may be inconsistent with 

19   see generally, den heijer 2013. 
20   in further support of the asylum seekers right to choose where to file, see, hathaway 1991. see also, 
goodwin-gill and mcadam 2007, 394-95, for an overview of differences of views and policies under modern 
law. broadly, the safe third country concept is one which permits states to send asylum seekers to third 
countries with which the applicant has some connection making it reasonable for him or her to go there, and 
where the applicant can receive refugee protection consistent with the 1951 convention and not otherwise be 
subject to direct or indirect refoulement. id.
21   united nations high commissioner for refugees, the safe third country policy in the light of the 
international obligations of countries vis--vis refugees and asylum seekers, london, july 1993, quoted in 
mole and meredith 2002.
22    see  generally,  us,  canada  initial  safe  third  country  final  draft  agreement,  (2002)  interpreter 
releases 79(37): 1431. 

336

journal on migration and human securityinternational standards. an asylum seeker may be denied protection in one jurisdiction but 
not in another. such an imbalance in outcomes should, in principle, be avoided.23
prototypes of the safe third country agreement which reflect a lack of political will to 
provide international human rights protection where it is needed are the schengen24 and 
dublin25 conventions. historically, these treaties required that an asylum seeker virtually 
apply  in  the  first  signatory  state  into  which  he  or  she  came  into  contact.  subsequent 
movement to another signatory state would entail the refugees being returned to the country 
of first presence for determination of his or her refugee status claim. this regime was 
later supplemented by a resolution on a harmonized approach to safe third countries 
which provided that once an asylum seeker presented a claim for international protection 
in a signatory state, an initial decision had to be made as to whether there was a safe host 
country outside the european union (eu) to which the noncitizen could be sent before any 
determination was made on whether another state within the eu has jurisdiction to hear the 
application (achermann and gattiker 1995, 22-23). if such a safe country existed, the 
alien was to be sent there. if it did not, the asylum seeker would be transferred to the country 
of first presence within the eu which would, once again, make a fresh determination as to 
whether a safe host country existed outside the eu before it would entertain the claim. 
the dublin convention has now been effectively superseded by two eu regulations which 
have been styled as dublin ii.26 dublin ii does make some improvements. however, 
dublin ii remains, for the most part, a restatement of the old convention-based regime 
under which the country of first presence remains the state responsible for adjudicating the 
application for international protection (goodwin-gill and mcadam 2007, 400-02).
safe third country options are extremely controversial and, in the opinion of many scholars, 
derogate in practice from the protections of the 1951 convention (hathaway 2005, 324-
32; see also borchelt 2002; dunstan 1995) among other things, such agreements clearly 
promote the refugee in orbit syndrome which has raised such concern among refugee 
scholars and which frustrates the rational planning of any transnational system of burden 
sharing under which refugee rights are to be taken seriously. under the refugee in orbit 
syndrome, a refugee claimant is returned to another state where he or she is deemed to 
have a prior presence and which in turn declines jurisdiction either because there is another 
country of first presence or because of a need to re-adjudicate the safe host country issue.27
the  recent  us-canada  safe  third  country  agreement  avoids  this  dangerous  pitfall, 
but  it  clearly  presents  other  dangers.28 among  other  things,  the  agreement  (which  was 
23   id. 
24   convention applying the schengen agreement of june 14, 1985 between the governments of the states 
of the benelux economic union, the federal republic of germany and the french republic on the gradual 
abolition of checks at their common borders, june 19, 1990, 30 i.l.m. 84 [schengen agreement].
25   convention determining the state responsible for examining applications for asylum lodged in one 
member state of the european communities, june 15, 1990, 30 i.l.m. 427 [dublin convention].
26    council  regulation  (ec)  no.  343/2003  (dublin  ii)  of  feb.  18,  2003  and  commission  regulation 
(ec) no. 1560/2003 of sept. 2, 2003. see also, european commission press release, determining which 
member state is responsible for an asylum application  dublin convention improved and transformed 
into a european community regulation, available at: http://europa.eu.int/comm/justice_home/news/intro/
printer/news_191202_en.htm.
27   id.
28   agreement between the government of the united states and the government of canada for cooperation 

337

reconfiguring the law of non-refoulementimplemented in 2005) provides that individuals who present themselves for admission at a 
land border port of entry, or who are being removed from the territory of one signatory state 
into the territory of another, will be returned to the country of first presence for adjudication 
of their refugee claims.29 the agreement thus does not (as is commonly believed) preclude 
double filing, since an asylum seeker could file in one jurisdiction and then enter without 
inspection into the territory of another and file a second time. this aspect of the agreement 
has been strongly criticized since it would seem to promote smuggling and disorder at the 
border, one of the principal goals which it was entered into to avoid.30 
concerns about enforcement of the treaty on the canadian side flow from the united states 
continuing use of the death penalty and excessive reliance on terrorist related grounds of 
inadmissibility in determining eligibility for refugee-type relief. as is well-documented, 
the  united  states  use  of  its  material  support  provisions  preclude  from  asylum  or 
withholding claimants who have been coerced into supporting questionable organizations 
thereby eliminating any consideration of individual responsibility in applying this already 
excessively broad terrorism-related preclusion (settlage 2012, 142).31
in the related area of the persecutor bar, for instance, the unhcr has crafted an exception 
which would eliminate from the bar individuals who are coerced into administering serious 
harm provided that the harm they fear is imminent and greater than the harm they would 
inflict. 32 the exception is tailored, in other words, to reach those cases which have intrinsic 
merit and would avoid the truly harsh consequences of applying the bars indiscriminately 
to those asylum seekers who may constitute a security risk for the host state and those who 
do not.33 adopting the proposed test of unhcr to those charged under the terrorism 

in the examination of refugee status claims from nationals of third countries (agreement), available at: 
http://gov/graphics/lawsregs/draft/agree090402.pdf. 
29   id. 
30   see, family unity, other issues discussed at house hearing on the us-canada safe third country 
agreement, (2002) interpreter releases 79 (41): 1570.
31   the terrorism related grounds of inadmissibility, or trig, include the bar to asylum existing for 
those who provide material support to a terrorist organization. see, 8 usc  1158 (b)(2)(a)(v) and 8 
usc  1182(a)(3)(b)(i)(vi).. section 208(b)(2)(a)(v) precludes from asylum individuals who have engaged 
in terrorist activity. terrorist activity, in turn, is defined to include the commission of any act which the 
agent knows or should know affords material support [to an individual or terrorist organization] including a 
safe house, transportation, communications, funds, transfer of funds or other material financial benefit, false 
documentation or identification weapons (including chemical, chemical, biological or radiological weapons), 
explosives or training [.]. terrorist organization is defined in section 212(a)(3)(b)(vi) as one designated 
as such by statute, [tier i] as one designated as a terrorist organization by the department of state by 
regulation [tier ii], and finally as any organization of two or more persons which has engaged in prohibited 
terrorist activities. see, 8 usc  1182(a)(3)(b)(vi).
32   for a restatement of the customary international law test, see hathaway 1991, 218. the test has been 
approved and is in effect in canada. ramirez v. m.e.i., (1992), 135 n.r. 390 (f. c.a.). see also, negusie v. 
holder, 555 us 511 (2009), in which the supreme court rejected the boards previous application of the 
persecutor bar on the ground that the agency was looking at the wrong statute as authority for its view that 
the existence of coercion was extraneous to a finding on whether the bar applied. although negusie was 
decided in 2009, no ensuing decision of the board has yet been made.
33   for an excellent discussion of the security-related provisions of article 9 of the refugee convention 
[giving states the right to adopt provisional measures towards individuals who constitute risks to national 
security],  see  hathaway  1991,  263-66.  hathaway  recommends  an  especially  restrictive  interpretation  of 
article 9 in light of its potentially preclusive nature.

338

journal on migration and human securitybars would avoid criticisms of the statute as presently interpreted to the effect that, by not 
individualizing the cases which are before them, agencies and courts have departed from 
the obvious intent and purpose of the refugee convention and protocol that the threats to 
the security of the host state be actual, and not presumed. 
the  most  egregious  feature  of  safe  third  country  agreements,  however,  is  that  they 
completely  eliminate  any  choice  of  forum  on  the  part  of  the  asylum  seeker,  thereby 
subverting the refugees freedom to determine where to file, which is a right recognized 
under international law. usually cited as a virtue of the system, this component constitutes 
a potentially fatal weakness. some jurisdictions are simply more liberal than others with 
respect to specific types of claims. it is now broadly recognized, for instance, that canada 
has remained the advance party with respect to a number of types of claims, notable among 
them asylum applications arising out of civil war scenarios, those based on draft resistance 
or desertion, and gender-based claims predicated on domestic violence.34
moreover, the united states has recently announced, through its board of immigration 
appeals (bia), a firm stance against asylum cases brought by children seeking to avoid 
involvement with criminal gangs. as discussed below, canada has adopted a policy of 
allowing such claims in appropriate, if limited, circumstances.35 should not the asylum 
seekers choice of forum be honored in such instance? it is one thing to adopt a controversial 
position against certain types of cases based on largely ideological grounds. it is another 
thing  entirely  to  impose  that  result  on  the  international  system  by  preventing  refugee 
claimants from reaching a jurisdiction wherein their claims can be heard within a favorable 
framework of decision. such results should be eschewed by signatory states rather than 
be encouraged by them. and the policy against forum shopping should be subject to 
an  appropriate  exception  recognizing  in  the  asylum  seeker  the  right  to  access  a  more 
sympathetic forum. this should particularly be the case where return of the asylum seeker 
to the home state would raise grave issues under the law of non-refoulement.

iv.  the  one-year  filing  deadline  and  limits  on  employment 

authorization
under the immigration and nationality act (ina), as amended in 1996, asylum seekers 
are not eligible if they apply for relief more than one year after their arrival in the united 
states. over an 11-year period ending in june 2009, this measure affected more than 30 
percent of affirmative asylum seekers; i.e., those who filed for asylum with the department 
of homeland security (dhs), as opposed to seeking asylum in removal proceedings before 
an immigration judge (schrag et al. 2010, 688). as has been widely noted, many asylum 
seekers do not speak english, making preparation of a pro se claim a virtual impossibility. 
the usual preoccupations of those seeking protection is to secure the aid of friends and 
family members who can give the alien shelter and otherwise provide the necessities of 
life. access to a professional is difficult at best, and the pro bono publico bar is presently 
overwhelmed  with  cases  making  representation  even  more  difficult  (legomsky  and 
rodriguez 2009, 1045-46).

34   see, for example, von sternberg 2002, 254-98 and authorities cited therein.
35   see, section b.iv, infra.

339

reconfiguring the law of non-refoulementdhs  justifies  this  restriction  by  insisting  that  the  one-year  filing  deadline  applies  to 
asylum only, and not to the other mandatory relief provided under international law, i.e., 
withholding of removal under ina section 241(b)(3) [the relief provided for under article 
33 of the 1951 convention] and relief under article 3 of the convention against torture. 
while this is formally true, asylum is the only remedy which provides the asylum seeker 
with an immediately available durable remedy, i.e., local integration. denying that remedy 
under international law and policy must be supported by a valid state interest. such an 
interest cannot be identified: there is simply no governmental concern which is addressed 
by forcing asylum seekers to file within a particular time period (see pistone 1996, 95).36 
on the other hand, there is considerable prejudice to the asylum seeker by imposing such 
a restraint.
all asylum seekers in the united states are subject to the employment authorization rules 
which prescribe that work permission cannot be granted until the application has been 
pending for at least 150 days. an application which has been pending without adjudication 
for over 180 days will confer automatic work authorization.37 these new rules, however, 
foreclose asylum seekers to the us job market while their claims are pending and thus make 
it potentially impossible to advance a claim. the deleterious effects of the employment 
authorization  regime  include  more  homelessness,  psychological  deterioration,  stress, 
illegal  work,  exploitation  and  begging  (legomsky  and  rodriguez  2009,  1060).  the 
practice is made all the more offensive in that most other jurisdictions allow asylum seekers 
to work while their claims are pending (ibid.). 

v. expedited removal and detention

expedited removal was introduced into us law in the 1996 reform legislation.38 in broad 
outline,  those  who  arrive  with  false  documents  or  no  documents  are  to  be  summarily 
removed without a hearing. if the alien makes any one of three representations (i.e., that 
she wishes to apply for asylum, that she fears persecution, or that she has concerns about 
return), she is to be placed in a credible fear interview.39 in that interview, she must show 
a significant possibility that she could make out a developed asylum claim, or she will be 

36   some scholars have suggested that denying asylum to those who file more than one year after arriving in 
the united states offends international law because it forces such refugee claimants to fall back on the balance 
of probabilities test contained in section 241(b)(3) of the statute, and there is no support for the conclusion 
that those seeking to show they are entitled to non-refoulement under article 33 of the convention are subject 
to a higher standard under international law than are refugees under article 1(a)(2). such arguments do have 
support in seminal treatise writers. see, for example, grahl-madsen 1966, 196. the travaux preparatoires 
do not explain the different wording chosen for the formulations respectively of refugee status and non-
refoulement; but neither do they give any indication that a different standard of proof was intended to be 
applied in one case rather than in the other. notwithstanding the support in treatise law, a change in results 
in us law would require the us supreme court to overturn its own precedent decision in cardoza-fonseca 
v. ins. 480 us 421 (1987). this development is far from likely, especially since the plain language in the 
convention tends to support the courts reasoning. 
37   8 cfr  208.7(a)(1). no employment authorization shall issue prior to the running of the 180 day period. 
ina  208(d)(2).
38   see generally, illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act, pub. l. no. 104-208 (1996).
39   ina  235(b)(1)(a). a comparable procedure exists for those advancing claims under the convention 
against torture. see, 8 cfr  208.31.

340

journal on migration and human securityreturned forthwith to the country of embarkation.40 during the pendency of that interview, 
the asylum seeker is to be detained.41 the statute says nothing about detention after the 
asylum seeker is found to have a credible fear. 
the statute and the implementing regulations provide that the following four classes are 
subject to expedited removal:42

 

 

aliens who present themselves at a us port of entry as arriving aliens43 (although 
that term is nowhere defined in the statute); 
aliens arriving by sea;44

 
  noncitizens who are physically present in the united states without having been 
admitted  or  paroled  who  are  (1)  encountered  by  dhs  within  100  miles  of  the 
canadian or mexican border, and (2) cannot establish to the satisfaction of dhs 
that they have been within the united states for more than 14 days;45
aliens who are subject to the us-canada safe third country agreement.46 

procedural protections are significantly lacking in this process. threshold questions continue 
to exist with respect to what happens at the encounter between immigration inspectors and 
persons potentially subject to expedited removal. in this first meaningful interview with 
dhs, the alien must make one of the three representations which are set out above (see 
ramji 2001, 117). to what degree is there effective communication between dhs front-
line officers and otherwise qualifying asylum seekers (due to the absence of translators or 
other causes)? to what extent are those with a fear of persecution being returned at this 
stage without any kind of meaningful interview and, thus, in contravention of customary 
international law? an environment of comparative secrecy has historically surrounded the 
inspection process (see legomsky and rodriguez 2009, 1052-56). moreover, even when 
the alien succeeds in having herself made the subject of a credible fear interview by 
an asylum officer, an immigration judge has only limited review over this determination 
within seven days.47 these and other features of the law have given rise to the possibility 
that  the  united  states  may  well  be  violating  the  law  of  non-refoulement  without  such 
violations being documented. 
questions about the credible fear process as a whole are particularly relevant now that the bia 
has announced its controversial policy (noted above) of disfavoring asylum claims brought 
largely by children seeking to avoid recruitment into criminal gangs and fearing personal 
violence by these gangs as a result. the asylum officers training manual specifically adds 
matter of m-e-v-g-48 and matter of w-g-r-49 to the considerations which an asylum officer 
must  take  into  account  in  determining  whether  a  credible  fear  of  persecution  has  been 

40   ina  235(b)(1)(b)(i).
41   ina  235(b)(1)(b)(iii)(iv).
42   ina  235(b)(1)(a)(i) and (iii); 8 cfr  235.3(b)(1).
43   8 cfr  235.3(b)(1).
44   67 fr 68924 (nov. 13, 2002).
45   69 fr 4887 (august 11, 2004).
46   69 fr 69479 (nov. 29, 2004). 
47   ina  235(b)(1)(b)(iii)(iii).
48   26 i&n dec. 227 (bia 2014).
49   26 i&n dec. 208 (bia 2014).

341

reconfiguring the law of non-refoulementestablished.50 these cases add a social distinction and a particularity requirement to 
the now widely accepted acosta test for social group (immutability, fundamental beliefs, or 
past associations which have become immutable through the passage of time). in so doing, 
these cases threaten to frustrate the natural evolution of asylum law through development 
of the social group ground which, according to classical refugee scholarship, remains open-
ended. the specific nature of this threat flows from the nature of the social group ground 
itself which has been repeatedly held to provide the most accessible framework wherein 
the convention refugee definition can evolve by recognizing new developments in human 
rights  and  humanitarian  law,  and  by  taking  account  of  fresh  patterns  of  discrimination 
which could not have been anticipated at the time the convention was drafted.
shutting down this evolutionary process through the credible fear interview poses risks of 
considerable magnitude. for it is through new types of cases that the future growth of 
the law can crystallize. negative results, taking place at the credible fear stage, effectively 
cauterize this process, leaving the potential development of the jurisprudence in a conceptual 
black hole. the fact that this cauterization will take place without any effective review 
process, and without a decisional record of any kind, makes this development a particularly 
deleterious one, and one which is particularly damaging to the public interest. 
a second level of concern relates to the continuing detention of asylum seekers after they 
have  met  the  significant  possibility  standard.  expedited  removal  was  an  attempted 
codification  of  international  customary  law  relating  to  the  filing  of  frivolous  asylum 
claims (see kerwin 2001, 3). states are permitted to return aliens summarily where they put 
forward asylum claims which are utterly baseless or which are false (i.e., are manifestly 
unfounded or abusive).51 where an alien meets the credible fear standard, however, such 
concerns should receive less deference.52 detention which goes beyond the states interest 
in guarding itself against spurious applications can no longer be defended as supported 
by a valid public interest: the states justification in continuing detention becomes more 
questionable (see goodwil-gill 2003, 185). 
the views of goodwin-gill largely parallel those of unhcr. as concerns article 31(1), 
prosecuting asylum seekers for presenting false documents or otherwise penalizing illegal 
entrants without regard to the circumstances of flight in individual cases as well as the 
refusal to consider their refugee claims, constitutes a violation of the convention and of 
general  international  law  (goodwin-gill  2003,  218). with  respect  to article  31(2),  the 
detention of asylum seekers is an exceptional measure and recourse should be had to it 
only in the circumstances permitted by law. a balancing of interests is required in this 
process. states should always apply the least restrictive alternative, and less burdensome 
measures (such as reporting and residence requirements, guarantors, bail, and the use of 
open centers) usually are available. detention should never last beyond the period needed 
to satisfy the criteria relative to identity and well-founded fear and never should be used to 
deter asylum seekers from advancing their claims (ibid., 231). 

50   us citizenship and immigration services, asylum officer training course: credible fear. 2014, 25-26, 
available at: http://cmsny.org/wp-content/uploads/credible-fear-of-persecution-and-torture.pdf.
51   unhcr, unhcrs position on manifestly unfounded applications for asylum, 1 december 1992, 3 
european series 2, p. 39, available at: http://www.refworld.org/docid/3ae6b31d83.html. 
52   ina  235(b)(1)(b).

342

journal on migration and human securityin  2005,  the  us  commission  on  international  religious  freedom  (uscirf)  issued 
a  significant  report  under  the  international  religious  freedom act  which  responded  to 
specific congressional concerns regarding alleged irregularities which had arisen during 
the  course  of  the  expedited  removal  process  (uscirf  2005). among  other  things,  the 
report contains the following conclusions:

  there existed a wide divergence of release rates between jurisdictions.
  asylum seekers were often incarcerated in extremely harsh and inhuman conditions, 

and sometimes interred with common criminals.

  a significant proportion of aliens (15 percent) who had made one of the required 
representations (wish to apply for asylum, fear of persecution, or concern regarding 
return) were nonetheless being returned by immigration officers without undergoing 
a credible fear interview. 

  the  rate  of  finding  no  credible  fear  by  asylum  officers  with  respect  to  those 
interviewed  was  extremely  low  (about  one  percent).  however,  with  respect  to 
review by immigration judges: about 25 percent of those found to have a credible 
fear  who  were  represented  by  counsel  in  immigration  court  prevailed  in  their 
asylum claims, while only about two percent of those who were not so represented 
were successful (kuck 2005, 239).

these findings go far to support the views of critics of congressional policy to the effect that, 
in their administration of the law, dhs has produced serious gaps in protection. two years 
after the adoption of expedited removal, uscirf issued a subsequent report concluding 
that,  although  the  shortcomings  of  the  system  had  not  been  adequately  addressed,  the 
program was still being expanded (uscirf 2007).
mindful of these considerations, dhs in 2010 adopted a more progressive parole policy with 
respect to detained persons under the expedited removal regime. basically, us immigration 
and customs enforcement set forth criteria for parole which would be governing under the 
following circumstances:

(i)  the respondent has passed the credible fear examination so that it is clear that a 
significant possibility exists that he or she could advance a mature asylum claim if 
given the opportunity to do so; and

(ii) satisfactory evidence exists as to the respondents identity.53 

despite these advances, human rights first has noted that the reforms in practice are not 
advancing with adequate speed and are not reaching a sufficient number of applicants.54 
in  response  to  the  situation  in  the  united  states  and  elsewhere,  unhcr  adopted  new 
guidelines  on  detention  in  2012  making  clear  that  indefinite  and  mandatory  forms  of 

53    memorandum  from  joseph  e.  langlois,  chief,  asylum  division  of  us  immigration  and  customs 
enforcement, to quality assurance/training asylum officers, re: providing notification of ices parole 
guidelines to arriving aliens found to have a credible fear of persecution or torture. 30 december 2009. 
available 
at:  http://www.uscis.gov/sites/default/files/uscis/outreach/notes%20from%20previous%20
engagements/memo%20-%20providing%20notification%20of%20ices%20parole%20guidelines.pdf. 
54    press  release,  human  rights  first,  human  rights  first  urges  fulfillment  of  detention  reform 
promises,6  october  2010,  available  at:  http://www.humanrightsfirst.org/our-work/refugee-protection/
detention.

343

reconfiguring the law of non-refoulementdetention violate general international law. in connection with the asylum process proper, 
the guidelines mandate that detention may be used only to secure the identity of the asylum 
seeker,  and  to  assure  that  the  resulting  claim  is  not  manifestly  unfounded  or  abusive. 
detention may also be utilized in the asylum context to assure public safety and health 
standards, but any such restrictions must be proportional to the interests which they serve. 
beyond these broad public purposes, special measures must be adopted to assure that the 
rights of vulnerable classes are respected, including lesbian and gay applicants, women 
and children and children with disabilities, with a search for alternatives to detention being 
actively considered (unhcr 2012).

part b: substantive scope of the norm of non-refoulement

i. prefatory remarks

there are inherent limitations to the relief provided by protection against persecution and 
torture, and the effort of international law to deal with these limitations is reserved for 
the later sections. for the moment, it is essential to remark that scholars are divided on 
whether non-refoulement, as a customary norm, is limited thematically to the persecution 
and  torture  scenarios,  or  whether  the  law  of  non-return  may  be  more  encompassing. 
there has been considerable commentary (and some case law) to the effect that states are 
under a customary law injunction to refrain from returning noncitizens to countries which 
are affected by full-blown civil war.55 this development has been largely the product of 
expanding interpretations of the customary law of non-refoulement. there may well be 
other contexts in which the bar is applicable, including those in which the noncitizen will 
be returned to conditions threatening his or her right to life.56
some writers have seen in this form of temporary protection an emerging, albeit truncated, 
right to asylum.57 recent developments within the unhcr support an extension of this 
temporary right to those intercepted by a state or states on the high seas. it now seems clear 
that the norm of non-refoulement, with its corresponding right to temporary admission, will 
influence the developing law of territorial asylum.  emanations from the underlying right 
of non-refoulement are effectively restraining state action in the immigration field so as to 
provide the affirmative, or positive, side of the dialectic which is presently informing 
international human rights protection.

ii. the customary norm of non-refoulement

several  sources  are  consulted  here  with  respect  to  modern  scholarly  views  of  non-
refoulement, after which there will be an effort to place these in the context of modern 
practice. the most recent study of non-refoulement is the highly influential article written 

55   for a dispute among scholars on this issue, see goodwin-gill 1986, 897; perluss and hartman 1986, 551. 
for a contrary view, see hailbronner 1986, 857. 
56   see, for example,  iv.a, infra.
57   see, for example, helton 2003, 162-66 (referring to the right to temporary admission as provisional 
asylum).

344

journal on migration and human securityby elihu lauterpacht and daniel bethlehem (2003, 87). the article draws upon some of the 
jurisprudence which is analyzed in this study, and it concludes that the customary norm of 
non-refoulement includes a bar against return in whatever form under circumstances where 
the alien would be exposed to:
a threat of persecution;
a real risk of torture, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
a threat to life, physical integrity or liberty (ibid., 150).

 
 
 

thus  while  the  convention  itself  bars  both  torture  and  cruel,  inhuman  and  degrading 
treatment,  article  3  protection  (the  non-refoulement  clause)  extends  only  to  those 
individuals who can demonstrate that they are likely to be tortured (rosati 1997, 1777). 
despite  this  limitation,  there  is  a  growing  consensus  that  the  customary  law  of  non-
refoulement, in its present form, extends to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment as well 
as to torture (lauterpacht and bethlehem 2003, 87). the distinction between torture on the 
one hand, and cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment on the other, is coming to produce 
dramatic differences in result, as is evidenced by the adjudications of the european court 
of  human  rights  at  strasbourg.  in  any  case,  it  would  appear  that  return  to  the  death 
penalty syndrome meets the normative requirement for non-refoulement. 
among the areas which have been developed by the strasbourg court has been the question 
of protection for those who would be returned to conditions of ongoing civil conflict. the 
strasbourg court has ruled in this respect that, where the intensity of violence in the home 
state is such that it must have an impact on any individual living there, article 3 relief is 
appropriate.58

iii. competing models of international protection

two representative models which offer absolute protection based on a showing of objective 
displacement are the organization of african unity (oau) convention and the cartegena 
declaration. these instruments enlarge considerably the concept of refugee. the oau 
convention,59 for instance, expands the refugee definition to include (besides those who 
would otherwise be covered under article 1a(2) of the 1951 convention) individuals who 
have been displaced by external aggression, occupation, foreign domination or events 
seriously disturbing public order.60 
the  cartagena  declaration,61  built  upon  the  oaus  philosophy  to  provide  protection 
from  objective  conditions  (such  as  generalized  violence  or  mass  violations  of  human 
rights) which proved threatening to social existence in general.62 these two instruments 
constitute unambiguous improvements over the refugee convention where large numbers 

58   sufi and elmi v. united kingdom (european court of human rights, app. nos. 8319/07 and 11449/07, 
28 june 2011).
59   see, for example, convention governing the specific aspects of refugee problems in africa, u.n.t.s. 
14691, entered into force june 20, 1974 [oau convention]. 
60   id., art. ii(2).
61   cartegena declaration, in annual report of inter-american commission on human rights 1984-85, 
oea/ser.l/ii.66, doc. 10, rev. 1, at 190-93 [cartegena convention].
62   id., art. iii(3).

345

reconfiguring the law of non-refoulementof refugees are seeking conditions of safety in the host state. during time of mass influx, 
the oau convention and the cartegena declaration would permit group admissions based 
on a form of common victimization rather than the highly individualized and difficult to 
administer well-founded fear test.63 
the  essential  model  of  protection  advanced  through  this  approach  (i.e.,  human  rights 
violations leading to flight irrespective of targeting based on a policy of discrimination) 
eventually gained acceptance as customary international law. in the wake of the yugoslavian 
war  of  1991-1994,  certain  european  states  (most  notably  germany)  found  that  they 
were  confronted  by  mass  influxes  which  were  extremely  difficult  to  process  under  the 
individualized machinery of the 1951 convention. these states accordingly implemented 
what became later known as the customary norm of temporary refuge. temporary refuge 
is now recommended by the unhcr as providing a flexible form of protection.64 those 
covered by the customary norm would include persons who fled from areas affected by 
violence and those who, by reason of their personal situation, are presumed to be in need 
of protection.65
temporary  refuge  clearly  provides  for  an  expedited  method  of  protection  and  avoids 
the  prolonged  factual  determinations  inherent  in  refugee  status  proceedings.  group 
determinations  are  based  on  easily  verifiable  conditions  in  the  home  state  (e.g.,  mass 
violations of human rights flowing from acts of ethnic cleansing, etc.). and there is no 
need on the part of those seeking protection to show that they have a well-founded fear 
of persecution.66 all of these protection regimes have common characteristics. the chief 
benefit is the continuing right of non-refoulement, the right not to be returned to conditions 
in which human rights are not being maintained to an acceptably minimal level. on the 
other hand, each of these regimes is temporary in nature: the alien can be returned when the 
conditions giving rise to flight have subsided. hence these regimes do not follow the north 
american and european model of permanent asylum.

63    group  determinations  are  permissible  under  the  1951  convention,  but  are  hardly  ever  resorted  to. 
see, unhcr, handbook on the procedures and criteria for determining refugee status under the 1951 
convention and the 1967 protocol relating to refugees  44 (geneva 1992). apart from these treaty-based 
regimes, the un general assembly has expanded unhcrs mandate from time to time to include largely 
undefined categories of persons whom the world organization deems worthy of international protection. 
accordingly, the commissioners competence has been broadened to include the following: refugees and 
displaced persons of man-made disasters; refugees and displaced persons of concern to the office of the 
high  commissioner;  refugees  and  externally  displaced  persons;  and  refugees  and  other  persons  to 
whom the high commissioners office is called upon to provide assistance and protection. in interpreting 
these terms, unhcr has historically turned to the refugee definitions set forth in the cartegena declaration 
and the oau convention. un general assembly, note on international protection, 7 september 1994, a/
ac.96/830,  32, available at: http://www.refworld.org/docid/3f0a935f2.html. 
64   un general assembly, note on international protection, 7 september 1994, a/ac.96/830,  46, available 
at: http://www.refworld.org/docid/3f0a935f2.html.
65   id.,  47.
66   id.,  46.

346

journal on migration and human securityiv. exceptional leave to remain, article 15(c) of the qualification 
directive,  and  canadas  new  consolidated  grounds  approach  to 
international protection
exceptional  leave  to  remain  has  long  played  a  role  in  european  asylum  systems.  it 
remains as one of the most widely used methods within the eu to obtain protection where 
the convention refugee definition cannot be satisfied.67 relief under state provisions relating 
to subsidiary protection strongly track state responsibility under article 3 of the echr, 
in the sense that the criteria to be met have generally been similar.68 several significant 
differences have characterized treatment under exceptional leave to remain on the one 
hand, and article 3 relief on the other: (1) relief under article 3 confers only the right to 
non-refoulement while exceptional leave to remain has usually bestowed status on the 
noncitizen; (2) exceptional leave to remain falls subject to the refugee conventions 
exclusion grounds, while article 3 relief does not.69
exceptional  leave  to  remain  has  also  been  subject  to  state  discretion,  and  criteria 
supporting relief have varied from one state system to another (mcadam 2005, 562). in 
2004, the eu announced a qualification directive70 which would at least set down minimum 
standards for obtaining relief on a humanitarian basis. the directive indicates that it applies 
to any noncitizen with respect to whom there are substantial grounds for believing that 
the person would, upon return, face a real risk of suffering serious harm as defined in 
article 15. article 15 establishes what serious harm means:

  death penalty or execution;
 

torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment of the applicant in the 
country of origin; or
serious and individual threat to a civilians life or person by reason of indiscriminate 
violence in situations of international or internal armed conflict (ibid., 469-93).

 

the first clause is an apparent effort to codify the jurisprudence of the soering decision71 
in  which  the  echr  determined  that  it  would  violate article  3  of  echr  for  a  state  to 
return  an  individual  to  face  capital  punishment  in  the  united  states  under  specified 
circumstances. the dispute over the death penalty will undoubtedly continue to mark this 
striking difference between the manner in which the eu (joined by canada) on the one 

67   for an excellent study on the potential reach of subsidiary or complementary relief, see, mcadam 
2007, 462. 
68  article 3 of the european convention on fundamental rights and freedoms precludes repatriation to 
a country wherein the alien will be subject to torture or to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. 
there  exists  a  close  correlation  between  cruel  and  unusual  treatment  or  punishment  on  the  one  hand, 
and  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  on  the  other.  see  generally,  immigration  and  refugee  board  of 
canada paper on consolidated grounds in the immigration and refugee protection act: persons in need of 
protection - risk to life or risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment, 2002,  4.5.1 and 4.5.1.1. 
available at: http://www.irb-cisr.gc.ca/eng/boacom/references/legjur/pages/protectlifvie.aspx#s1. 
69   for an excellent review of the new directive, see, mcadam 2005, 462.
70   counsel directive 2004/83/ec of 29 apr. 2004 on minimum standards for the qualification and status of 
third country nationals or stateless persons as refugees or as persons who otherwise need international 
protection and the content of the protection granted [2004] oj l304/12, available at: http://europe.eu.int/
eur-lex/pri/en/oj/dat/2004/1-304/1-30420040930en00120023.pdf.
71  161 eur. ct. h.r. (ser. a) 50 (1989). 

347

reconfiguring the law of non-refoulementhand, and the united states on the other, treat torture relief. how this conflict will finally 
be resolved unquestionably depends of how general international law comes ultimately 
to  treat  imposition  of  the  death  penalty.  importantly,  for  purposes  of  resolution  of  this 
question, a number of significant universal and regional instruments enjoin abolition of 
the death penalty altogether. among these instruments are optional protocol number 2 to 
the international covenant on civil and political rights (with a limited exception for war 
crimes);72 protocol number 6 to the echr;73 and a protocol to the american convention on 
human rights to abolish the death penalty.74 apart from the above, state practice is clearly 
moving away from the death penalty as a legitimate sanction for violations of municipal 
law (steiner and alston 1996, 807-09).
the second clause appears to be a specific reference to echr article 3 jurisprudence, and 
would seem to incorporate case law of the strasbourg court (mcadam 2005, 478-79). 
finally, the third clause is the one which would appear to go beyond the existing case law 
in covering those who objectively would be threatened with indiscriminate violence upon 
return. this clause has obvious potential to address the situation of civil war victims who 
have legitimate claims to protection even though they cannot show individual targeting. 
nonetheless, it would appear from a reading of the entire text of the directive that such was 
not the intent of the directive since:

risks to which a population of a country or a section of the population is generally 
exposed do normally not create in themselves an individual threat which would qualify 
as serious harm. (ibid., 481, quoting directive recital 26)

as one excellent review of the directive notes this recital gives rise to substantial problems. 
it suggests, among other things, that the violence supporting a claim must be more than 
random. this reading, however, would cause the recital to clash with the text of article 15s 
definition of serious harm (ibid., 481-82). 
a recent case which has revolutionized the law in this area is elgafaji v. staatssecretaris 
van justitie,75 where the european court of justice (ecj) ruled on the substantive standard 
which had to be met in order for the claimant to receive relief under article 15(c). the 
claimant was an iraqi national whose father had worked for british security services. the 
ecj ruled that a claimant under article 15(c) was not obligated to show that he would 
be  targeted  by  virtue  of  his  personal  circumstances.  rather,  in  a  decision  which  was 
largely followed by the strasburg tribunal in sufi and elmi, when determining the scope 
of article  3  of  echr,  the  court  determined  that  a  claimant  could  be  granted  relief  by 
demonstrating that the level of violence in the relevant country or region was such that any 
individual facing such conditions would fall subject to the threat contained in article 15(c). 
in  sketching  the  methodology  it  would  follow,  the  ecj  determined  that  the  claimants 
individual circumstances and the intensity of the violence in the country of origin were 

72   g.a. res. 44/128, annex, 44 u.n. gaor supp. (no. 49) at 207, u.n. doc. a/44/49 (1989), entered into 
force july 11, 1991, available at http://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/instree/b5ccprp2.htm.
73   available at: http://www.mfa.gov.tr/grupe/ed/eda/pro6.htm.
74   available at: http://world.policy.org/americas/dp/achr-dp.html.
75   case c-465/07 (court of justice of the european union, grand chamber, 17 february 2009), ecr [2009] 
1-921. two recent pieces explaining the decision in the context of united states and world developments are 
the following: fullerton 2013 and lambert 2013.

348

journal on migration and human securitycoefficients of each other. hence: (a) the higher the level of internal violence the claimant 
was able to show, the lower would be her burden to make out an individualized risk; and 
conversely (b) the greater the claimants individual risk by virtue of special circumstances, 
the lower the level of internal violence which must be shown.76
this paper argues that the rulings in both sufi and elmi and in elgafaji represent customary 
international law.77 together, they reflect a growing trend in the formation of opinio juris 
pursuant to which the tribunal looks to, not whether there is an agent in the country of 
proposed deportation who will target the claimant for serious harm, but rather whether 
the refouling state is under an obligation to refrain from acts which will expose the 
claimant to torture or to cruel, inhuman and/or degrading treatment. where the claimant 
satisfies his or her burden of proof concerning the certainty of risk (whether by virtue of 
the exceptionally high level of violence prevailing in the relevant state or region, by virtue 
of the claimants personal situation, or through a combination of the two), the normative 
standard should be considered to have been met. 
the  ruling  in  sufi  and  elmi,  predicated  on  the  high  level  of  violence  in  the  state  of 
proposed  deportation,  supported  a  grant  of  non-refoulement  under article  3  of  echr. 
article  3  rulings  have  always  served  as  strong  evidence  of  the  emergence  of  a  rule  of 
customary law (lauterpacht and bethlehem 2003, 159). the decision in elgafaji, on the 
other hand, providing for non-return based on a high level of violence in the state or region, 
on the claimants personal situation, or on some combination thereof, serves mainly as 
a methodological support to the strong normative result shared by the strasbourg court 
and by the ecj. indeed, in sufi and elmi, the european court of human rights (ecthr) 
acknowledged the strong relationship between article 3 of echr and article 15c of the 
european  qualification  directive,  noting  that  the  two  provisions  offered  comparable 
forms of relief. 
hlne lambert has described how the decision in elmi and sufi had been preceded by 
a  number  of  ecthr  cases  holding  that  individuals  might  be  exposed  to  serious  harm 
by virtue of their position standing alone (e.g., members of minority clans in somalia) 
(lambert 2013, 229).  lambert also notes the humanitarian plight often occasioned by 
acts  of  violence  arising  from  civil  strife  (homelessness,  famine,  disease)  and  remarks 
that  protection  against  these  developments  may  well  fall  within  the  ambit  of  the  two 
provisions.78 taken together with the irreducible ethical underpinnings of the normative 

76   elgafaji, supra. in the united states, practitioners began to advance that the customary law of non-
refoulement  precluded  return  of  noncitizens  to  states  which  were  engulfed  in  seismic  civil  conflicts 
characterized by violations of the laws of war. this theory was rejected in two major decisions, one by the 
board of immigration appeals, and one by the ninth circuit. matter of medina, 19 i&n dec. 734 (bia 1988); 
echeveria hernandez v. ins, 923 f.2d 688 (9th cir. 1991). this paper submits that elgafaji contemplates 
a different situation, and where the individual can show, either because of the intensity of the violence, or 
because the claimant would be affected because of his or her personal situation, the standard of the customary 
norm has been met.
77   the analysis here builds on the customary right to non-refoulement as opposed to the right which exists, for 
instance, under the convention against torture and under regional treaties such as article 3 of the european 
convention on human rights. there exists substantial overlap between these three forms of relief. for an 
explanation of these remedies in modern practice, see lauterpacht and bethlehem 2003, 158. 
78    see  meron  1989,  87  proposing  consideration  of  the  fundamental  ethical  character  of.  a  norm  in 
determining its customary law character. meron was discussing the nicaragua judgment, 1986 international 

349

reconfiguring the law of non-refoulementrule itself (protection against certain risk based on objective conditions), it is submitted 
that both sufi and elmi and elgafaji represent independent but highly inter-related rules of 
general international customary law.
canadian  law  has  adopted  the  substance  of  this  new  standard  in  the  reforms  which 
parliament passed in 2002. canadas new immigration and refugee protection act (irpa)79 
enlarges considerably the grounds upon which international human rights protection may 
be sought in canada. presently, protected status can be conferred based upon any one of 
the following showings:

 
 
 

the individual fears persecution based on a convention refugee ground;80
the individual is in danger of torture;81 or
there is a risk to the individuals life, or a risk of cruel and unusual treatment or 
punishment.82 

the  last  two  grounds  have  now  been  substantially  developed  in  two  position  papers 
prepared by canadas immigration and refugee board (irb).83 both papers are extensive 
and will not be analyzed in detail here. however, it is important to note that the bases for 
relief covered by canadas new statute and in the irb papers track both the predicates 
for humanitarian leave to remain and, to a large degree, the scope of non-refoulement as a 
customary norm developed by lauterpacht and bethlehem. the passages which follow will 
lay significant stress on the first of these papers (risk to life or risk of cruel and unusual 
treatment or punishment) to ascertain the meaning of the very central terms which are 
used in the new provisions and which the papers seek to define.84
the irb paper on risk to life or risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment 
court of justice 14, which looked to the public declarations of states as evidence of opinio juris rather than 
to the practice of states. sufi and elmi (as well as elgafaji) are thus related to that broader range of decisions 
initiated by d- v. the united kingdom, no. 146/1996/767/964, european court of human rights, given at 
strasbourg , may 2, 1997, prohibiting as a violation of echr article 3 the return of an alien to st. kitts 
where such refoulement would entail an agonizing death from aids due to the absence of adequate medical 
resources in the country of origin. 
79   immigration and refugee protection act, s.c. 2001, c. 27 [irpa]. the full title of the act is: an act 
respecting immigration to canada and the granting of refugee protection to persons who are displaced 
or in danger.
80   id.,  96.
81   id.,  97(1)(a).
82   id.,  97(1)(b). 
83   immigration and refugee board legal services division, consolidated grounds in the immigration and 
refugee protection act: persons in need of protection: danger of torture (may 15, 2002); immigration and 
refugee board legal services division, consolidated grounds in the immigration and refugee protection 
act: persons in need of protection: risk to life or risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment (may 
15, 2002) [hereinafter irb paper on risk to life or risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment]. 
84   at  the  outset,  it  is  necessary  to  observe  that  neither  form  of  relief  is  the  product  of  canadas  direct 
obligation under an international treaty. irpa  97(1)(a) and  97(1)(b) are statutory creations which borrow 
from treaty law, international customary law, and sometimes from canadian domestic law. accordingly, the 
bars to refugee status [articles 1f(a), (b) and (c)], which would not preclude relief under cat (nor under 
echr article 3) do preclude relief under irpa  97(1)(a) and  97(1)(b). accordingly, those who have 
committed crimes against humanity, war crimes or crimes against the peace are not eligible to apply, as are 
those who have committed serious non-political crimes or acts contrary to the purposes and principles of the 
un. 

350

journal on migration and human security(2002)  looks  both  to  canadian  jurisprudence  and  to  international  adjudications  for 
guidance in determining what kinds of harm are protected against. principal among these 
determinations  have  been  the  rulings  of  the  ecthr  at  strasbourg.  under  the  accepted 
standard, there is no requirement that the harm feared be connected to a protected ground. 
accordingly, threats based on personal vendettas or retaliation over private loss may satisfy 
the new test (although there must, naturally, be a showing that there is an absence of state 
protection). and, the claimant need not demonstrate that the threat is directed at him or her 
personally, only to a group to which the claimant belongs. nonetheless, victims of random 
violence do not qualify unless they can show that the risk to which they are exposed is 
greater than that faced by other citizens of their homeland generally. the position paper 
thus invites an analysis which would conform to that adopted by the ecj, i.e., one in which 
the intensity of the violence is balanced against the individualized threat to the applicant.85
an important feature of section 97 of the irpa jurisprudence is its ability to reach situations 
in  which  classical  refugee  doctrine  has  proven  largely  ineffective. an  example  of  this 
case law (referred to briefly before) is the situation of individuals largely situated in latin 
america who have been targeted by criminal gangs because the claimants have refused 
to cooperate with them. this situation has been discussed previously in connection with 
the drawbacks of regional refugee protection systems which force upon the claimant a 
particular forum in which to file. the subject is raised here to analyze how the canadian 
model (somewhat like the european in this respect) can create remedies for victims of gang 
violence where the american model has largely failed.
in tobias gomez v. canada,86 a salvadoran family sought refugee status and relief under 
section 97 based on the following facts. the family had been repeatedly threatened and 
extorted by ms-13 gang which had attempted to recruit the principal applicants son. the 
federal court trial division reversed the immigration and refugee board based on its 
failure to consider whether the son was a member of a particular social group based on 
his opposition to ms-13s recruitment practices for purposes of the convention refugee 
definition under section 96 of irpa. the most important aspect of its ruling, however, 
was the courts ruling under section 97. for there, the court clearly drew the line between 
generalized harm (not a basis to fear either persecution or torture), and an individualized 
threat. specifically,

in my view[t]he applicants were originally subjected to threats that are widespread 
and prevalent in el salvador. however, subsequent events showed that the applicants 
were specifically targeted after they defied the gang. the gang threatened to kidnap mr. 
tobias gomezs wife and daughter, and appear determined to collect the applicants 
outstanding  debt  of  $40,000.00. the  risk  to  applicants  has  gone  beyond  general 
threats and assaults. the gang has targeted them personally.87 

85   irb paper on risk to life or risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment,  3.1.7.
86   (f.c.t.d., no. imm-6423-10), september 23, 2011). 
87   id.

351

reconfiguring the law of non-refoulementv. the american model of temporary protected status: protection 
based on situational need as opposed to the well-founded fear test
of  all  the  models  which  have  been  discussed  so  far,  that  which  provides  the  broadest 
coverage is unquestionably the us temporary protected status (tps) model. subject to its 
conditions (which are considerable as is shown below), tps provides protection against 
not merely gross human rights violations in the home state, but also other destabilizing 
factors, such as economic or natural calamity, which have made social life in the country 
of origin non-sustainable.88 in this sense, tps approaches the ideal of protection based on 
humanitarian need which has been put forward by francis deng in the un guidelines on 
internal displacement. those guidelines apply to:

persons or groups of persons who have been forced or obliged to flee or to leave their 
homes or places of habitual residence, in particular as a result of or in order to avoid 
the effects of armed conflict, situations of generalized violence, violations of human 
rights or natural or human made disasters, and who have not crossed an internationally 
recognized state border.89

in a similar way, us law, through the ina  244, sets forth the conditions under which the 
attorney general (now dhs) may designate a state (or a part of a state) for tps purposes. 
these conditions are:

  the  state  to  which  repatriation  would  be  effected  is  engaged  in  internal  armed 
conflict so that returning the alien thereto would pose a serious threat to his or her 
personal safety. 90

  there has been a natural calamity in the state in question such as an earthquake, 
drought, or environmental disaster which has resulted in a significant disruption of 
living conditions. for this ground to apply, it must also be shown that the foreign 
state is temporarily unable to accept return of its own nationals, and that the foreign 
state has requested designation officially.91

  there are other extraordinary and temporary conditions in the foreign state which 
prevent  nationals  from  returning  in  safety,  provided  that  the  attorney  general 
does not find that the temporary stay of these non-nationals in the united states is 
contrary to the us national interest.92

to be eligible under section 244, a qualifying alien must show:

  that s/he  is  a national of  the designated state (or,  if not a national, that s/he is 

88   ina  244(b)(1).
89   see, further promotion and encouragement of human rights and fundamental freedoms, including 
the question of the programme and methods of work of the commission of human rights, mass exoduses 
and displaced persons. report of the representative of the secretary general, mr. francis deng, submitted 
pursuant to commission resolution 1997/39 (addendum), u.n. doc. e/cn.4/1998/53/add.2, 54th sess., 
annex [guiding principles on internal displacement or guiding principles] (1998), introduction, scope and 
purpose,  available  at:  http://www1.umn.edu/humanrts/instree/guidingprinciplesoninternaldisplacement.
htm.
90   ina  244(b)(1)(a).
91   ina  244(b)(1)(b).
92   ina  244(b)(1)(c).

352

journal on migration and human securitystateless and that the designated state is the country of last residence). 93

  the alien has been physically present within the united states since the date of the 

dhss most recent designation of the country involved. 94

  the noncitizen has resided continuously in the united states since the designation 

by dhs. 95

there can be no doubt but that tps has provided a widely utilized remedy since it was added 
to the statute in 1990. the countries (or parts of countries) which have been designated 
for  tps  protection  include  the  following:  el  salvador,  honduras,  liberia,  montserrat, 
nicaragua,  sierra  leone,  somalia,  sudan,  angola,  bosnia,  guinea-bissau,  kuwait, 
lebanon,  province  of  kosovo,  serbia-montenegro,  and  rwanda.96  these  designations 
have been on a variety of grounds including gross civil rights violations flowing from civil 
war (liberia, for instance),97 to the occurrence of natural calamity such as a devastating 
hurricane (honduras).98 
serious limitations in the statutory remedy, however, dramatically curtail its effectiveness 
in ways which often make it appear unreasonable. for instance, protection under ina 
 244 extends only to those who are in the united states at the time of designation. this 
aspect of the legislation clearly reflects congressional anxieties regarding the prospect of 
promoting mass influxes into the united states if the statute were to be extended to those 
arriving after designation in the hope of securing a safe haven. nonetheless, the automatic 
cessation  of  benefits  for  those  arriving  after  the  designation  date  draws  an  essentially 
arbitrary line as concerns the protected class contemplated by the humanitarian purposes 
of the statute.  
there is no reason, in principle, to offer protection to those already here at the time of 
designation, while denying it to those arriving afterwards: both categories stand in the same 
need.  moreover,  since  designation  itself  is  usually  coeval  with  human-made  or  natural 
calamity, those already here would probably not be motivated to flee such catastrophe in 
coming to the united states, but would have come here for alternative reasons. the class 
which would be coming here to seek protection, those arriving after the event giving rise to 
designation, would be the class least likely to receive it.
another,  and  perhaps  more  disturbing  feature  of  the  legislation  relates  to  the  need  for 
designation before the right to such protection can be asserted. under ina  244, no form of 
temporary non-deportability will be conferred unless a designation under ina  244(b) has 
been made by dhs. not every country meriting designation has received it. like the cut-
off point running from the entry of dhss order, the requirement of designation eliminates 
whole populations from protection who, in principle, should qualify for it (kerwin 2014, 
56-57). one glaring example of the limitations under discussion relates to haiti right after 
jean bertrand aristides deposition and forced expulsion in late 1991. designation was not 
conferred on haiti until the shattering earthquake of 2009, despite widely accepted country 

93   ina  244(c)(1)(a)(i).
94   ina  244(c)(1)(a)(ii).
95   ina  244(c)(1)(a)(iii).
96   see, 8 cfr part 244 [temporary protected status: country reference chart].
97   56 fr 12746 (march 27, 1991).
98   64 fr 524 (jan. 5, 1999).

353

reconfiguring the law of non-refoulementcondition reports showing that haitians were suffering under systemic human rights abuses 
at the hands of security forces and their allies.99
in  this  connection,  the  jurisprudence  of  the  strasburg  court  under  article  3  of  the 
qualification directive and of the ecj under article 3 of echr is more limited than tps: 
protection is far from automatic and, as has been seen, its scope has not been effectively 
extended to the large categories of human-made or natural disaster which are now covered 
under ina  244. nonetheless, the european approach at least has the potential to reach 
those in flight for humanitarian reasons which the tps provisions do not. obviously, an 
adjudicative approach trades off certainty of result for the comparative benefit of not being 
eliminated from protection by arbitrary time lines or by exclusionary rule-making as to the 
countries from which flight will confer eligibility for relief. 
what  is  needed  in  the  united  states  is  a  case-based  jurisprudence  which  would  offer 
an  individualized  remedy  based  on  a  showing  that  removal  would  offend  prevailing 
humanitarian standards. at a minimum, the new standard should incorporate the language 
of article 7 of the international covenant on civil and political rights (iccpr) and article 
3 of echr to the effect that: states parties must not expose individuals to the danger of 
torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment upon return to another 
country  by  way  of  extradition,  expulsion  or  refoulement.100  such  jurisprudence  would 
provide for a period of humanitarian stay, temporary in nature, based on an individualized 
showing that return of the noncitizen to the country of origin would subject him or her to 
conditions which offend prevailing humanitarian standards. 

conclusion
this paper argues that the united states obtains far more constructive results when it turns 
to international law than when it relies exclusively on domestic law. this observation holds 
true whether one is looking at the procedural aspects of a case (e.g., when protections 
begin to apply), or to substantive elements (e.g., who at the end of the day is entitled to 
protection). some practical policy recommendations follow.
chief among the policy recommendations is that sale v. haitian council centers should be 
legislatively overturned. congress should make clear that us jurisdiction exists wherever 
the nation exercises power in fact, whether that locus be on the high seas or through some 
pre-screening device as was the case in the prague airport case. it should provide that 
there can be no direct or indirect refoulement without a personal interview which would 
inquire into whether the noncitizen: (1) has a concern about returning; (2) wishes to apply 
for asylum; or (3) fears persecution in the home state or torture anywhere in the world. sale 
has done substantial damage by encouraging states to employ strategies which constitute 
violations of the law of non-refoulement. the hirsi case together with the response of other 

99   for an excellent overview of fixes which could be made to the current tps system, see, bergeron 2014. 
100   general comments adopted by the human rights committee, no. 20,  3, reprinted in general comments 
adopted by the human rights committee, nos. 1-23, reprinted in note by the secretariat, compilation of 
general comments and general recommendations adopted by human rights treaty bodies, u.n. doc. no. 
hr1/gen/1/rev. 1 (29 july 1994). significantly, prohibited acts of torture include acts of third parties. id., 
 13.

354

journal on migration and human securityjurisdictions and the opinion of scholars, offers evidence that sale is not consistent with 
opinio juris. as it did when adopting the refugee act of 1980, the united states should 
bring its own law into conformity with general international law, including customary law 
and jus cogens, a peremptory norma of international law. 
in  calling  for  the  statutory  overturning  of  sale,  the  author  is  mindful  of  the  political 
difficulties.  eliminating  interdiction  in  this  manner  may  be  more  of  long-term  project 
than an immediate legislative possibility. however, sale constitutes a salient violation of 
a fundamental rule of customary international law (the right of non-refoulement) and its 
legislative  reversal  would  seem  appropriate  as  a  matter  of  public  policy.  it  would  also 
render us immigration strategy more consistent with the countrys long-standing concern 
with human rights as manifested in the public policy underpinnings of the refugee act of 
1980.
in the area of safe third country agreements, there should be some acknowledgement of the 
asylum seekers right to choose his or her forum of adjudication. accordingly, provision 
should be made, both in the us-canadian model and in all such future agreements, to 
permit onward travel and admission to the country of destination for individuals who have 
not yet filed a protection claim in the country of first presence under specific conditions. 
these conditions would include: (1) circumstances where the jurisprudence of the country 
of destination provides a significantly more favorable framework of decision; and (2) return 
of the alien to the home state raises serious questions under the law of non-refoulement. 
such a measure would preempt the phenomenon of double filing (something the current 
regime does not do), while preserving the individuals customary right to choice of forum. 
restoring this right of choice would, moreover, help to address imbalances in the modern 
system under which certain types of claims are recognized by some signatory states but not 
by others.
work authorization and detention should also be revisited. today, permission to work is 
covered by statutory schemes permitting the application for an employment authorization 
document  only  after  150  days  have  elapsed  after  the  filing  of  an  asylum  claim.  this 
arrangement has led to much hardship for asylum seekers, often making it impracticable 
to advance or pursue a claim. the majority of jurisdictions retain more generous work 
authorization regimes. this paper proposes that the united states should emulate these 
signatory states by adopting a statutory scheme which would allow work permission upon 
the filing of a non-frivolous application for asylum.
the  current  requirement  was  designed  to  deter  the  filing  of  manifestly  unfounded  or 
abusive  claims. the  difficulty  and  unfairness  of  the  resulting  system  has  derived  from 
the fact no effort was made to segregate bona fide claims from those which were not. the 
indiscriminate hardships of a waiting period (to obtain work authorization) imposed on the 
frivolous and non-frivolous alike operated to discriminate against those genuinely in need 
of surrogate international human rights protection. 
as concerns the question of detention, it appears clear that there is no division in principle 
between the goals of us standards and international law. with few exceptions, detention is 
permissible only to ascertain the identity of the asylum seeker and to assure that the claim, 
as  filed,  is  not  manifestly  unfounded  or  abusive. a  rule  of  proportionality  is  followed, 

355

reconfiguring the law of non-refoulementexplicitly in international practice, mandating that any detention not be excessive in view 
of the goals it is intended to secure. us practice should adopt and adhere to this principle.
as concerns expedited removal, congress was mindful in 1996 of the manner in which 
unfounded  asylum  claims  could  be  used  to  facilitate  access  to  us  territory  without  a 
proper visa. in the illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 
(iiraira), it sought to expand the restrictions against putative refugees by providing for 
their summary or expedited return in the absence of specific representations, or for 
failure to meet the credible fear standard before an asylum officer. for those who qualified 
for a credible fear interview, there remained the prospect of imminent and certain detention 
which could be prolonged after the credible fear interview had been passed (legomsky 
and rodriguez 2009, 506-07). expedited removal imposes these restraints on genuine and 
the non-genuine asylum seekers alike, thereby arguably subjecting refugees to a penalty 
in derogation of the convention. this paper recommends a statutory provision mandating 
release from detention once (a) the noncitizen has passed the credible fear interview; and 
(b) satisfactory evidence has been introduced regarding the asylum seekers identity. 
the final policy recommendation relates to the scope of the substantive relief which can 
be sought in the united states. at present, available remedies are essentially restricted to 
asylum and/or withholding of removal (predicated on a showing of serious harm based 
on race, religion, nationality, membership in a social group, or political opinion), or to an 
objective demonstration that the individual would be tortured if returned. european law 
has exceeded these particularized and often narrow formulas, and permits relief predicated 
in large measure on generalized conditions obtaining in the country of origin.101 this is 
a step forward of considerable magnitude. the us model of tps (which mirrors these 
protections in part, and often goes beyond them) suffers from the integument of politics in 
the process of designating states in the first place. in addition, persons in most need of 
reliefthose who fled the triggering event itself, whether civil war, drought, or a shattering 
earthquakeare  excluded  from  protection  by  virtue  of  the  provision  which  precludes 
coverage for those arriving post-designation. 
congress should pass legislation to incorporate into us law the broad relief now available 
under article 3 of the echr and article 7 of the iccpr, referred to earlier. the remedy 
created  should  include  as  well  relief  pursuant  to  the  elgafaji  standard  conferring  non-
return  coupled  with  status  where  either  the  intensity  of  the  violence  in  the  home  state 
standing alone, or the intensity of that violence taken in conjunction with the claimants 
individual circumstances, support a finding that the alien would be impacted upon return.102 
the adoption of a supplementary approach (at least where civil war claims are concerned) 
would, through the flexibility of an adjudicative model, more adequately accommodate the 
needs of those in need of protection. such a system would bring us law into conformity 
with  the  customary  law  of  non-refoulement  and  help  restore  the  countrys  historical 

101   elgafaji v. staatssecretaris van justitie. case c-465/07 (court of justice of the european union, grand 
chamber, 17 february 2009), ecr [2009] 1-921.
102   see, for example, kerwin 2014. in a similar, but more comprehensive, series of policy recommendation, 
the author suggests, inter alia, the adoption of a nonimmigrant visa for those who face persecution, danger 
or harm flowing from conditions in the country of origin. the proposal made here would confer relief upon 
those already in the united states (irrespective of when they arrived), provided that they could satisfy the 
statutory standard either before an immigration judge or before dhs.

356

journal on migration and human securitycommitment to human rights and humanitarian concerns. 
serious  barriers  have  been  erected  in  the  united  states  with  respect  to  access  to  non-
refoulement  and  concerning  the  normative  standard  governing  relief  itself.  the  united 
states should look to advances made in the legislation and jurisprudence of other states 
as  a  model  for  its  adoption  of  more  appropriate  standardsboth  on  procedure  and  on 
substance. customary international law and the scope of non-refoulement require no less.
 
references

achermann,  alberto  and  maria  gattiker.  1995.  safe  third  countries:  european 
developments. international journal of refugee law 7(1): 19-38. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/ijrl/7.1.19

bergeron,  claire.  2014.  temporary  protected  status  after  25  years:  addressing  the 
challenge of long-term temporary residents and strengthening a centerpiece 
of us humanitarian protection. journal on migration and human security 2(1): 
23-43. http://dx.doi.org/10.14240/jmhs.v2i1.23

borchelt, gretchen. 2002. the safe third country practice in the european union: a 
misguided approach to asylum law and a violation of international human rights 
standards. columbia human rights review 33(2): 473-525.

den heijer, maarten. 2013. reflections on refoulement and collective expulsion in the 
hirsi  case.  international  journal  of  refugee  law  25(2):  265-90.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/ijrl/eet020

dunstan,  richard.  1995.  playing  human  pinball:  the  amnesty  international  united 
kingdom  section  report  on  uk  home  office  safe  third  country  practice. 
international  journal  of  refugee  law  7(4):  606-52.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
ijrl/7.4.606

farber,  sonia.  2010.  forgotten  at  guantanamo:  the  boumediene  decision  and  its 
implications for refugees at the base under the obama administration california 
law review 98: 989-1022.

fullerton, maryellen. 2013. stealth emulation: the united states and european protection 
norms. in the global reach of european refugee law, edited by hlne lambert, 
jane mcadam and maryellen fullerton, 201-24. new york: cambridge university 
press.

goodwin-gill, guy s. 1986. non-refoulement and the new asylum seekers. virginia 

journal of international law 26(4): 897-918. 

. 1993. us supreme court take aim at international law  again. international 

journal of refugee law 5(3): 461-62. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ijrl/5.3.461

. 2003. article 31 of the 1951 convention relation to the status of refugees: non-
penalization,  detention  and  protection.  in  refugee  protection  in  international 

357

reconfiguring the law of non-refoulementlaw:  unhcrs  global  consultations  on  international  protection,  edited  by 
erika feller, volker turk and francis nicholson, 185-252. new york: cambridge 
university press. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/cbo9780511493973.011

. 1996. the refugee in international law. 2nd ed. new york: oxford university 

press.

goodwin-gill, guy s. and mcadam, jane. 2007. the refugee in international law. 3rd ed. 

new york: oxford university press.

grahl-madsen, atle. 1966. the status of refugees in international law. leyden: a.w. 

sijthoff.

hailbronner,  kay.  1986.  non-refoulement  and  humanitarian  refugees:  customary 
international  law  or wishful thinking?  virginia  journal  of  international  law 
26(4): 857-96.

hathaway, james c. 1991. the law of refugee status. toronto: butterworths. 
. 2005. the rights of refugees under international law. new york: cambridge 

university press. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/cbo9780511614859

helton, arthur. 2003. the price of indifference. oxford: oxford university press.
kerwin,  donald.  2001.  looking  for asylum,  suffering  in  detention.  human  rights 

28(1): 3-5.

. 2014. creating a more responsive and seamless refugee protection system: 
the  scope  promise  and  limitations  of  us  temporary  protection  programs. 
journal on migration and human security 2(1): 44-72. http://dx.doi.org/10.14240/
jmhs.v2i1.24

kuck,  charles  h.  2005.  legal assistance  for asylum  seekers  in  expedited  removal: 
a  survey  of alternative  practices.  in  report  on  asylum  seekers  in  expedited 
removal, volume ii expert reports,  235-50. washington, dc: us commission 
on  international  religious  freedom.  http://www.uscirf.gov/sites/default/files/
resources/stories/pdf/asylum_seekers/legalassist.pdf

lambert,  hlne.  2013.  introduction:  european  refugee  law  and  transnational 
emulation.  in  the  global  reach  of  european  refugee  law,  edited  by  hlne 
lambert,  jane  mcadam  and  maryellen  fullerton,  1-24.  new york:  cambridge 
university press. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/cbo9781107300743.001

lauterpacht,  sir  elihu  and  daniel  bethlehem.  2003.  the  scope  and  content  of  the 
principle of non-refoulement: opinion. in refugee protection in international 
law:  unhcrs  global  consultations  on  international  protection,  edited  by 
erika feller, volker turk and francis nicholson, 87-177. new york: cambridge 
university press. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/cbo9780511493973.008

legomsky, stephen h. and christina m. rodriguez. 2009. immigration and refugee law 

and policy. 5th ed. new york: foundation press.

358

journal on migration and human securitymcadam, jane. 2005. the european union qualification directive: the creation of a 
subsidiary protection regime. international journal of refugee law 17(3): 461-
516. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ijrl/eei018

.  2007.  complementary  protection  in  international  refugee  law.  oxford: 
oxford  monographs  in  international  law.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/acprof:o
so/9780199203062.001.0001

.  2013.  australia  and asylum  seekers.  international  journal  of  refugee  law 

25(3): 435-48. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ijrl/eet044

meron, theodor. 1989. human rights and humanitarian norms as customary law new 

york: oxford university press.

mole,  nuala  and  catherine  meredith.  2002.  asylum  and  the  european  convention  of 
human  rights.  strasbourg:  council  of  europe  publishing.  http://www.refworld.
org/pdfid/4ee9b0972.pdf. 

noll, gregor. 2005. seeking asylum at embassies: a right to enter under international 
law.  international  journal  of  refugee  law  17(3):  542-73.  http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/ijrl/eei020

parker, karen and lyn beth neylon. 1989. jus cogens: compelling the law of human 

rights. hastings international and comparative law review 12(2): 411-63.

perluss,  deborah  and  joan  f.  hartman.  1986.  temporary  refuge:  emergence  of  a 
customary international norm. virginia journal of international law 26(3): 551-
626.

pistone, michele r. 1996. asylum filing deadlines: unfair and unnecessary. georgetown 

immigration law review 10(1): 95-103.

ramji, jaya. 2001. legislating away international law: the refugee provisions of the 
illegal immigration reform and immigrant responsibility act. stanford journal 
of international law 37(1): 117-62.

rosati, kristen. 1997. the united nations convention against torture: a viable alternative 

for asylum seekers, interpreter releases 74(45): 1773-84. 

schrag, philip g., andrew i. schoenholtz, jaya ramji-nogales, and james p. dombach. 
2010. rejecting refugees: homeland securitys administration of the one-year 
bar to asylum. william and mary law review 52(3): 651-804.

settlage,  rachel  gonzales.  2012.  indirect  refoulement:  challenging  canadas 
participation  in  the  canada-united  states  safe  third  country  agreement. 
wisconsin  international  law  journal  30(1):  142-89.  http://hosted.law.wisc.edu/
wordpress/wilj/files/2013/01/settlage.pdf.

steiner, henry and philip alston. 1996. international human rights in context. oxford: 

clarendon press. 

359

reconfiguring the law of non-refoulementunhcr  (united  nations  high  commissioner  for  refugees).  2012.  guidelines  on  the 
applicable criteria and standards relating to the detention of asylum seekers. 
http://www.unhcr.org/505b10ee9.html.

uscirf (us commission on international religious freedom). 2005. report on asylum 
seekers in expedited removal. washington, dc: us commission on international 
religious  freedom.  http://www.uscirf.gov/reports-briefs/special-reports/report-
asylum-seekers-in-expedited-removal. 

.  2007.  expedited  removal  study  report  card:  2  years  later.  washington, 
dc:  us  commission  on  international  religious  freedom.  https://www.hsdl.
org/?view&did=470165. 

von  sternberg,  mark  r.  2002.  the  grounds  of  refugee  protection  in  the  context  of 

international human rights and humanitarian law. boston, ma: brill. 

360

journal on migration and human security