a voice of the us southwestern 
border: the 2012 we the border: 
envisioning a narrative for our 
future conference 

josiah mcc. heyman
university of texas at el paso 

executive summary
in july 2012, a diverse group of us residents living near the us-mexico 
border  met  in  el  paso,  texas  for  a  conference  entitled,  we  the  border: 
envisioning a narrative for our future.  this paper describes their vision 
for the us-mexico border that is at odds with the widespread view of the 
border  as  a  threat  to  the  united  states.  these  border  residents  viewed 
their region as a set of human communities with rights, capacities, and 
valuable insights and knowledge. they embraced an alternative vision of 
border enforcement that would focus on quality (dangerous entrants and 
contraband) over quantity (mass migration enforcement).  they called 
for investments in the functionality and security of ports of entry, rather 
than in between ports of entry.  they noted the low crime rate in us border 
cities, and examined how policies of not mixing local law enforcement with 
federal immigration enforcement contributed to this achievement.  they 
saw the border region as the key transportation and brokerage zone of the 
emerging, integrated north american economy.  in their view, the bilingual, 
bicultural, and binational skills that characterize border residents form part 
of a wider border culture that embraces diversity and engenders creativity. 
under this vision the border region is not an empty enforcement zone, but 
is part of the national community and its residents should enjoy the same 
constitutional  and  human  rights  as  other  us  residents.  the  conference 
participants  emphasized  the  necessity  and  value  of  accountability  and 
oversight of central government enforcement operations, and the need for 
border communities to participate in federal decision-making that affects 
their lives. 

 2013 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 1 number 2 (2013): 60-75introduction
the  us  border  with  mexico  is  the  subject  of  considerable  media  attention  and  policy 
concern.  in general, this discussion contains national-level views of the border, and does 
not take advantage of the knowledge, experience and values of border region residents. 
national -level views of the border vary, but often prioritize rigid and inaccurate notions of 
national security threats over realities of community well-being, democratic participation, 
and economic development in the region. this perspective undergirds the 2013 senate-
passed border security, economic opportunity, and immigration modernization act, and 
in  particular  the  corker-hoeven  amendment  required  for  its  passage.  the  amendment 
authorized doubling the number of border patrol agents (there are at present 18,500 agents) 
at the southern border, adding 350 more miles of pedestrian fence-wall to the existing 350 
miles, and a number of other conventional and advanced technology surveillance systems, 
even though unauthorized entries at that border are at lows not seen since the early 1970s.  
it is not just a matter of local residents having a different view, but a failure to hear the 
valuable insights of local residents regarding national and continental well-being, including 
improved security. the residents of the border region chafe at imposed narratives, and seek 
to provide narratives of their own, which they believe would be valuable contributions to 
the larger public discussion. 
in july of 2012, a diverse group of border constituents gathered in el paso, texas for a 
conference entitled we the border: envisioning a narrative for our future.  this meeting 
was deliberately constituted to represent a range of sectors of border society: immigrants 
and us born residents; local, state, and national elected officials; local law enforcement; 
the  department  of  homeland  security;  local,  regional,  and  national  non-governmental 
organizations  (ngos);  faith-based  organizations;  academics;  the  business  community; 
and border residents in general.  this paper reviews key themes from the conference and 
outlines its overarching vision for the border based on an excellent documentary record, 
including sector papers prepared for the conference (academic sector, faith-based sector, 
local law  enforcement, local elected officials,  and  ngos),  break-out groups  during 
the  conference  that  produced  thematic  summaries  (on  national  security,  community 
safety, economic development, and human and civil rights) and a final (still unreleased) 
statement, as well as other reports.1 of course, the present paper is the authors interpretation 
of the conference.  while there are broad areas of consensus among border actors, there 
is not a uniform set of opinions and experiences.  not all attendees agreed with all of the 
sector papers, thematic summaries, or the final statement, as is to be expected. 
this paper will first explain the importance of taking into account the perspectives and 
voices of border residents. second, it will delineate key themes from the conference, and 
explain  ways  they  add  to  national  and  continental  policy  understanding.    in  general,  i 
address us border communities and us perspectives and policies (the main focus of the 
conference), rather than attempting a parallel discussion of mexican interior and border 
perspectives.  however, an element of transnational awareness is, of course, essential to 

1  while not a formal product of the 2012 conference, a report issued by the border network for human 
rights in 2013, the new ellis island, contains much content originating in the conference (border network 
for human rights 2013).  likewise, reports issued after two previous border region conferences held in el 
paso relate closely to the 2012 initiative (us mexico border and immigration taskforce 2008; 2009).

61

a voice of the us southwestern borderunderstanding border voices.  from here forward, i will simply refer to the us side of the 
mexican border as the border.

the need for a border voice
in us national discourse, the border is generally treated as an uninhabited location of national 
concerns and policies delineated across abstract geographic space (nevins 2002). the only 
relevant persons are transitory crossers who are deemed subject to official examination and 
enforcement.  it is not envisioned as a region with a large, settled population, with interests, 
opinions, and rights, commensurate with all other people in the united states.  of course, 
policy makers, public administrators, and specialists recognize the complexity of border 
flows and the importance of us-mexico relations, but the dehumanized view of the border 
captures the essence of how the border is perceived and acted on.  even national actors who 
should know better are constrained by the political discourse of an empty border.  
nevinss (2002, 2010) important work on the historical rise and dominance of the walled, 
defensive  territorial  nation-state  includes  as  a  crucial  element  the  reductive  treatment 
in  political  and  media  discourses  of  mexico,  migrants,  and  the  border  region  as  one-
dimensional threats.  leo chavezs (2001) study of national magazine covers addressing 
immigration provides considerable evidence for the existence of this view of the border.  
such a narrative helps drive a symbolic political process, as explored by heyman (1999; 
2012) and andreas (2009), in which the border is never sufficiently secure, no matter the 
level  of  actual  control  and  resources  devoted  to  the  region.   this  vision  has  led  to  an 
enforcement system that targets migrants seeking to work and to join family in the united 
states, rather than one that targets advanced criminal organizations and the guns and money 
heading to mexico (heyman 2011).  drug law enforcement comes in and out of focus as 
a rationale for the border threat/response narrative, though over the long run it is seen as 
less important than labor migration. terrorism is spoken of as a threat, though a 2006 study 
shows that no salafist terrorists or terrorist materials had been intercepted at this border 
(leiken and brooke 2006) and i am unaware of any such case since then for which reliable 
information is available to the public.  
related to this narrative is a geographic emphasis on enforcement in between ports of 
entry rather than at ports of entry. ironically, the reductionist immigrant threat narrative 
about the border neglects important concerns and interests about the border even at the 
national and international levels.  these include multi-billion dollar flows of goods and 
investments between the two countries, water and other environmental resources, and a 
shared epidemiological environment.  a number of these issues focus on facilitation and 
regulation of flows at us-mexico ports of entry, some of the largest land border ports in 
the world.  these considerations were very important to the participants in the conference.  
yet the crucial point is not to argue which centrally imposed strategic policy is correct.  
the point is to learn about border perspectives for two reasons.  first, there is a large 
accumulation of regional experience and insight that should inform national and regional 
public policy.  but more important, in a democratic framework the people of the region 
should participate amply in public discussions, decision-making, and oversight of official 
conduct.  their participation should include but go beyond voting (the numbers of regional 
voters are not trivial, but are fragmented among four states, and voting rates in the region 

62

journal on migration and human securityare low).  their participation should also include consultation on policy formation and 
involvement in agency training, oversight, and accountability.  this is necessitated by the 
position of border-landers as persons and communities affected by official actions of a 
particularly massive and coercive kind who have ethical rights to participatory involvement.  
these ethical rights are particularly acute given the fact that border communities are the 
closest to and most knowledgeable about how these public policies and decisions play out.  
participation by border-landers in border enforcement and administration is a compelling 
case for devolution, quite different from the completely centralized national sovereignty 
framework currently applied to the region.  
in parallel, symons and heyman (2012) have demonstrated that people from outside the 
borderincluding  activiststend  to  have  simplistic,  one-dimensional  frameworks  for 
normative (moral) evaluation of and action toward regional issues.  the border is a site of 
unalloyed threat, or, conversely, pure suffering.  symons and heyman found that border 
perspectives tend to acknowledge normative complexities, subtleties, and grey areas in 
diverse boundary-crossing processes, as opposed to moral and political absolutes.  hence, 
border voices tend to deepen and enrich our normative thinking about difficult national 
and transnational issues, and add value to democratic decision-making.  the conference 
identified many stereotypes of the border and the often contrastive realities, as seen from 
border perspectives.  
of  course,  who  is  included in  the  border  constituency is  not  obvious.   a  reasonable if 
imperfect approximation of the us southwestern border region is all the counties that touch 
the international land boundary.2  this region had 7.3 million people in 2010, a significant 
number.    however,  its  geography,  socio-economic  profile  and  ethnic  makeup  tend  to 
marginalize it.  the border counties are often quite differentsocially, economically, and 
politicallyfrom the so-called border states of california, arizona, new mexico, and 
texas,  each  of  which  politically  pivot  on  large  interior  metropolitan  areas.   while  not 
simple, the broad contours of the debate in arizona over s.b. 1070 (the mandate for local 
and state police to inquire into immigration status in specific stops) involved support in the 
massive interior phoenix metropolitan area overriding widespread though not universal 
dissent from border communities and the metropolitan area of tucson.  
farther afield, the southwestern border region is likely distinctive in many regards, in terms 
of social composition and public policy opinions, from the entire national interior; if not 
substantiated through empirical study, this is certainly the feeling of border-landers.  the 
region near the land border with canada is beginning to experience intensified border and 
near-border federal law enforcement, and may be developing a border voice of its own 
(though without the bitter particulars of how the southwestern border and the nation as a 
whole relate to mexico and mexican-origin people).  obviously, mexicos northern border 
with the united states is also a borderland, with distinctive voices (see portions of vila 
2000; 2005); the 2012 conference focused on us public attitudes and policies, but it is 
in some ways informed by interaction with perspectives from mexico and especially its 
northern borderlands.  

2  see the list of counties in anderson and gerber 2008. for a useful introduction to the region, see ganster 
and lorey 2008.

63

a voice of the us southwestern borderthe border region tends to be marginalized in terms of public voice because of geographic 
location  and  lack  of  a  single  large  unit  of  political  representation.    it  is  also  heavily 
hispanic in most areas, mainly of mexican-origin, in some parts over 80 or 90 percent, 
in a country with at best ambivalent attitudes to mexican-origin people.  linguistically, 
the borderlands contain both monolingual english and spanish speakers, but a majority 
of persons are bilingual to some degree and some switch frequently between languages 
(g. martnez 2006).  as a result, some of the voices characteristic of the border tend to 
be  rendered  silent  in  an  english  dominant  nation  (this  is,  of  course,  not  unique  to  the 
region).  finally, the region is economically poor (except for san diego), and includes in 
texas some of the poorest areas in the country, reinforcing its political marginalization (for 
border socioeconomic data, see anderson and gerber 2008).
an  important  quality  that  border  voices  bring  to  the  national  discussion  is  extensive 
experience with interacting directly and often daily with mexico.  mexico is, of course, 
one of the united states most important partners in all dimensions (trade and investment, 
cultural exchange, interpersonal movement, politics, environment, and other shared policy 
issues).  border-landers especially tend to have transnational experiences and perspectives 
(see  o.  martnez  1994  on  everyday  transnationalism  on  the  border).   yet,  at  the  same 
time, the border-landers at the 2012 conference think of themselves as full participants 
in  and  members  of  the  united  states  polity,  as  seen  in  the  way  their  positions  were 
framed.  without more extensive survey research, it is difficult to be sure if this us-public 
policy orientation is representative of the border population as a whole, but it seems to 
be  widespread.   the  border  region  thus  can  bring  a  valuable  perspective  to  us  public 
conversations of communities that closely interact with mexico and mexicans, while at 
the same time remaining grounded in the united states. the concept of cultural citizenship 
(flores and benmayor 1997) addresses the tendency in nation-states, including the united 
states, to merge cultural assimilation with political membership and voice. it argues that 
culturally  (and  regionally)  distinctive  populations  can  at  the  same  time  be  active  and 
constructive within a national polity, which seems to describe well the case for listening to 
border voices.
in the remainder of the paper, i present the main themes from conference, as developed by 
attendees.  first will be issues of national security policy, and then local public safety and 
law enforcement.  the character and importance of the border economy will follow.  the 
final two major themes are the rights and personhood of all persons in the border region, 
in a context of intensive federal law enforcement, as well as the cultural distinctiveness of 
the borderlands and its value to the nation as a whole.  each theme will be developed in 
terms of locally perceived outsider stereotypes (termed myths at the conference), local 
responses to those stereotypes, a vision statement of a positive future for the region and 
the two nations, and suggested policy steps toward that positive future.  i offer additional 
evidence and assessment at times to deepen the discussion, but in general the goal is to 
report on these border voices and their contributions to wider national discussions.

national security
the  border  is  an  important  site  for  federal  law  enforcement  (including  some  military 
involvement)  of  migration,  contraband  (especially  drug),  money,  and  gun  laws,  and 

64

journal on migration and human securitypotentially interdicting terrorists and terrorism materials. these activities are encapsulated 
here as national security or homeland security issues. for the purposes of this discussion, 
we set aside the question of whether these issues should actually be considered matters 
of national security (see heyman 2011); what mattered to the border conference were the 
specific  activities  within  those  frames,  the  gap  between  myth  and  reality,  and  possible 
alternative policies in this domain.  the key finding is that the border is an asset to national 
security, not a gap in it.
border security has, since 9/11, largely been justified as an extension of security against 
terrorism. this is identified as the principal mission of the border patrol, for example.  
despite this cover, u.s. border security policy has been little changed by 9/11 or other acts 
of terrorism. ackleson and heyman (2009) found much more continuity than change in u.s. 
border policies after 9/11, with a continuing focus on mass immigration enforcement at the 
mexican land border outside of ports of entry and to a lesser extent interdiction of physical 
drug contraband.  while this specific research was not discussed at the conference, a shared 
understanding of these paradoxical patterns was crucial to the conferences diagnosis of 
border security myths and policies.  
the  conferees  pointed  out  that  despite  stereotypes  of  an  imperiled  border,  there  have 
been no cases of political terrorism involved in the region.3 furthermore, acts or threats 
of violence of any motivation crossing or emanating from border crossers are few and far 
between.  (but see the discussion of drug-business related violence inside mexico below).  
the border conferees started from knowledge that the region is not a site of major threats, 
either locally or to the security of the nation.  as a result, the conference challenged the 
standard prescription about border security.  
in the standard prescription, the border region is considered a major site of risk to the 
national interior, rather than a site of secure and peaceful exchange and commerce.  the 
perceived threats blend (in an undistinguishing way) terrorists, migrants, and drugs.  these 
threats occur mainly in the spaces between the ports of entry where people are not supposed 
to enter the country.  hence, under this analysis, enforcement policies need to be continuous 
with and simply add resources to the existing border control paradigm. this would include 
raising border patrol staffing levels, technology, and infrastructure (including walls and 
other items), and support by the military, aimed at interdiction of unauthorized entries at 
the non-port boundary.4  a good example of mass enforcement is operation streamline, 
applied to many sectors of the border, where arrested undocumented border entrants with 
no other criminal acts or records are charged with federal-level misdemeanors and felonies 
(depending on the number of times apprehended at the border), tying up the majority of 
federal criminal enforcement resources (prisons, marshals, courtrooms, public defenders, 
and judges) throughout the border region (lydgate 2010).
this  perspective  has  failed,  in  the  view  of  border  observers,  to  undergo  modification 
to  reflect significant changes  over  time, including the  reduction in  2011  in  the number 

3  people from so-called special interest countries, such as lebanon or syria, are sometimes arrested 
at the border on immigration charges, but none have been linked to potential terrorism.  often, they are 
refugees fleeing persecution or war in those same countries.
4  for a detailed, up-to-date survey on border security and migrants, see isacson and meyer 2012.  for 
evidence of long-term patterns, see andreas 2009; dunn 2009; and nevins 2010. 

65

a voice of the us southwestern borderof  apprehensions  of  undocumented  migrants  at  the  border  to  levels  equivalent  to  1971 
(simanski and sapp 2012) and an estimated zero or negative net flow of unauthorized 
migrants from mexico to the united states (passel, cohn, and gonzalez-barrera 2012).  
more important, the border conference provided a novel and informative alternative policy 
vision for border security.
the vision can be summarized as a change from quantity to quality.  current policy 
focuses on numbers of arrests of unauthorized migrants, even if their security risk to the 
country is minimal.5  conferees advocated a change in the assessment of risks. in part, this 
means shifting the homeland security focus away from the u.s.-mexico border toward 
the potential paths of terrorist travel through airports and other ports of entry (ginsburg 
2010).  but it also means refocusing the security apparatus at the border on members of 
transnational criminal organizations (olson, shirk, and selee 2010).  likewise, it means 
going after the key flows that sustain criminal activities and organizations, including drugs, 
weapons  and  munitions,  and  especially  money  (goddard  2011;  heyman  2011).    such 
targeted investigations of people and key flows involves a thoughtful (and of course, rights-
respecting) investigation approach to border security, rather than mass arrests and mass 
punishment, as exemplified by operation streamline.
the key policy emphasis in the border conference was on directing new border management 
and security funds to ports of entry rather than enforcement in between ports, as in the 
current  policy.    ports  both  facilitate  legitimate  commerce  and  non-commercial  travel, 
and also detect and interdict contraband and other criminal flows.  the huge growth in 
cross-border movement in recent decades, especially after the north american free trade 
agreement (nafta) in 1994, has resulted in overwhelmed port infrastructure and staffing.  
overwhelmed  ports  fail  to  facilitate  legitimate  movement  or  to  provide  security  to  the 
region and the nation. heavy traffic and long lines do not just have economic and social 
impacts, but also mean that officers are pressured to clear traffic and are too busy to conduct 
smart and effective inspections.  hence, improvement of ports should not just be viewed 
as part of an economic agenda, but also as a well-justified target for investment in border 
security.  for example, the us department of justice national drug threat assessment 
(2011, 13) indicates that ports of entry are the main route for transportation of heroin, 
cocaine, methamphetamine, and large volume marijuana from mexico to the united states, 
though smaller-scale marijuana smuggling occurs between ports.  ports are also the main 
outbound routes for criminal money and weapons.  
conference participants, including law enforcement experts and other community voices 
with many decades of experience with the realities of the border, thus proposed an important 
alternative vision for us homeland security. the need for security was taken seriously, but 
the status quo understanding was challenged in three ways.  first, the conferees questioned 
if the us-mexico border, including the flow of unauthorized migrants, constitutes a core 
threat to national security in the way that the region is depicted nationally.  second, the 
conferees provided an alternative overall framework for how to secure the border and the 
nation, through the concept of shifting policy from quantity to quality.  and finally, the 

5  the vast majority of current targeted border-crossers are non-criminal workers and family members, a 
point that merits further empirical research for full substantiation but seems highly likely to all observers of 
border migration.

66

journal on migration and human securityconferees identified practical policy measures that could embody that shift, such as calling 
for new border management and enforcement resources to be devoted to ports of entry 
rather than border walls and border patrols.

community public safety
the border as threat narrative, which conceives of the border as an empty space, devoid of 
settlements and only of security importance to the interior, results in a persistent stereotype 
that border communities must be filled with dangerous criminality.  this is reinforced by 
violence in mexican northern border cities, which is truly horrific, but which in the main 
has not spilled over into us communities (finklea 2013).  in fact, the us side of the border 
is notably safe.  in 2012, el paso was the safest large city in the united states (for the third 
year in a row) and san diego was the second safest (cq press 2013).  the border conferees, 
like many border residents, resist the stigma placed on the us border as a dangerous place.  
what is more important is that the border conferencewhich included sophisticated law 
enforcement leaders, such as el paso county sheriff richard wilesprovided an analysis 
about the positive lessons the region can offer.  
the causes of us border community safety are not fully understood.  immigrants in the 
united states have age- and gender-specific crime rates (especially violent crime rates) 
that are lower than those of native-border residents (rumbaut 2009).  border communities 
have a large contingent of federal law enforcement agencies, which may contribute to a 
sense of attention to law violation, even if they are not directed toward common municipal 
crimes.  the social-cultural climate of border towns seems distinctly positive, considering 
their overall poverty and high chronic underemployment.  
however, border law enforcement leaders attribute low crime rates, in part, to a conscious 
community policing strategy.  an important part of this strategy has been keeping federal 
immigration enforcement as separate as possible from local law enforcement, within the 
constraints of state and federal imposed mandates (which are viewed negatively in most 
border communities).  this means that local police and sheriffs should not stop people on 
suspicion of being unauthorized migrants, or question victims or low-level misdemeanor 
offenders  about  immigration  status.    from  the  perspective  of  local  law  enforcement, 
to  do  this  would  be  a  wasteful  distraction  from  their  work,  and  more  important,  place 
barriers between law enforcement and the immigrant community, their family members 
and neighbors.  perhaps the widespread recognition of the dysfunction of mixing federal 
immigration enforcement and local policing comes from the everyday experience of border 
crossers and visitors from mexico in us border communities. whatever its origin, this 
is a lesson that can be brought from the border to the nation as a whole, with the goal of 
improving  public safety in communities comprised of immigrants and settled residents.  
this lesson can arguably be extended to such communities as a way to enhance civilian 
security in the fight against transnational organized crime and political terrorism.
conference participants were well aware of deadly violence and widespread criminality in 
mexico, including ciudad jurez, which is across the border from el paso. the violence 
in mexico presented a dilemma to conferees.  many have been active in raising awareness 
in the united states and proposing us public policy measures that might help to improve 
the situation.  on the other hand, violence in mexico slips in the us imagination across 

67

a voice of the us southwestern borderthe border, even if this is empirically inaccurate, to support the threat narrative about the 
region, and other kinds of stigmas that hurt and dismiss the borderlands.  the conference 
documents and discussion did not fully overcome this dilemma, and in the opinion of this 
writer, more needs to be said.  however, it is important to emphasize that the conference 
recommendations concerning an alternative vision for and specific policy positions about 
border/homeland  security,  discussed  above,  are  indeed  the  most  appropriate  responses 
from the us side to long-term reduction of criminality and violence in mexico.  these 
include redirecting enforcement focus from quantity to quality, which centrally addresses 
mexican criminal organizations rather than ordinary immigrants, paying more enforcement 
attention to money and weapons that fuel violence in mexico, and directing current and 
future budgetary resources toward ports of entry.  
while mexican criminal organizations operate in a number of border environmentssuch 
as collecting rent from human smugglers and farming out loads of marijuana to lower-
level  operators  to  transport  across  the  border  between  portsin  the  main,  the  highest 
value and most concentrated contraband of deadly weapons and the large quantities of 
physical cash are carried through ports.  thus, a more adequate us port policy has the 
potential to contribute to violence-reduction in mexico.  in addition, focusing on higher-
level trafficking of guns, drugs, and criminal proceeds at ports will have the beneficial 
effect of redirecting border drug enforcement away from low-level carriers (mules) and 
other such actors.  a shift toward ports and away from non-port border interdiction (where 
mules are disproportionately arrested) will help in this regard.6

recognizing the value of the border economy
the us border region in itself is relatively poor, except san diego.  however, it is the 
nexus of a highly valuable trade relationship between the two nations, the united states 
and mexico.  mexico is the united states third largest trade partner and the second largest 
destination of us imports (villarreal 2012), with a value of $459.8 billion dollars.  because 
of the land connection between the two countries, most of this trade moves across the land 
border, through border city ports of entry and exit.  in this regard, the southern land border 
offers lessons for other parts of the country.  for example, land border port policy reform is 
also relevant for trade with canada which is by far the united states largest trade partner.  
a central point of the conference was a long-term vision and narrative about the value 
of this trade, and making the rest of the nation aware of the centrality of border policies, 
communities, and people in making this trade occur.  likewise, there was a concern that 
us-mexico joint economic development be relatively equitable, that it help produce value 
for poor and middle class residents of both countries, help increase standards of living in 
the poor border region and enable potential migrants in mexico and central america to 
stay home, should they so choose.
appropriately, there was discussion at the conference about the free trade model of us 

6  in turn, this  will possibly reduce several tendencies that should concern us. these include 
disproportionate imprisonment of low-level drug criminals with enduring consequences for societal 
marginalization and the growth of expensive mass enforcement bureaucracies rather than targeted 
enforcement agencies on the governmental side.

68

journal on migration and human securityand  mexican  development,  particularly  since  nafta  began  in  1994.    this  approach 
has resulted in a tremendous boom in cross-border commerce and has strengthened the 
relocation of manufacturing to mexican border cities that started in the 1960s.  however, 
this  form  of  economic  growth  has  produced  largely  low-income  jobs  and  has  failed  to 
fund  infrastructural  investment  commensurate  with  the  extensive  urbanization  it  has 
generated.  nevertheless, conferees concluded that the region cannot easily escape this 
historical legacy, but rather needs to build on and improve it.  in particular, the borders 
key geographic position astraddle the continental routes of commerce and manufacturing 
provides an important role and voice that counters the empty zone/threat narrative about 
the region. in addition, it demonstrates a viable alternative to an economy based only on 
central government spending on boundary enforcement, and helps make the case that the 
fate of the border matters to the national interiors of the united states and mexico.
in this process of continental integration, the border region brings important commercial 
skills,  from  many  years  of  customs  brokerage  and  import/export  trade,  linguistic 
skills (ability to move between spanish and english), and cultural skills (in parallel to 
linguistic  skills,  ability  to  move  between  mexican  and  u.s.  cultural  repertoires).    the 
border perspective is that these assets are undervalued or even ignored in a narrative that 
prioritizes national interiors and that treats the border region only as a site of unwanted 
intrusion, risk, and social-cultural contamination.  given the enormous level of integration 
between the united states and mexico, the border voice offers an important correction to 
nationalistic us frameworks and policies based on them.  likewise, investing in ports of 
entry, discussed above in terms of effective security policy, is also justified economically 
by reducing long lines and inefficient inspections at the border.  in an important study, the 
san diego association of governments (2006, vii) found that: 

inadequate infrastructure capacity, which is failing to keep up with the increase in 
trade and security requirements at the principal border crossings between san diego 
county and baja california, currently creates traffic congestion and delay that costs 
the us and mexican economies an estimated us $6 billion in gross output in 2005 
().  fully 51,325 jobs are sacrificed because of the reduction in output.

about $3.3 billion of this cost involved freight delays, concentrated in the maquiladora 
manufacturing sector, and $2.6 billion involved personal trip delays.  most of the impact 
is regional, but a significant proportion of it is continental (for example, about $1.3 billion 
of the freight effects extend beyond california and baja california, states that are of global 
importance anyway). this is only one of many important ports in the us-mexico border 
region; while san diego-tijuana is the single largest non-commercial port on this border, 
laredo-nuevo  laredo  is  more  important  for  commercial  traffic,  and  el  paso-ciudad 
jurez, mcallen-reynosa, and brownsville-matamoros are important for both personal 
and commercial transit, and suffer from comparable impacts. the overall point is that the 
two nationsand especially the border-security obsessed united statesshould recognize 
the crucial positive economic value of the border region, its infrastructure, and its people, 
for the future national and continental economy.

69

a voice of the us southwestern borderborder society and culture
the nationalistic perspective looks on border people, cultures, and languages as threats 
to uniform national units. in the united states, there is anxiety about and stigma toward 
mexican-origin persons, the synthesis of us and mexican cultures, and the spanish language 
(see santa ana 2002), though there also is a substantial constituency that welcomes these 
contributions.  the border is substantially the converse of that narrow nationalistic vision.  
in this region, the majority of the population is bilingual in spanish and english (heyman, 
calculations from the american community survey, available from the author).  likewise, 
a  substantial  but  not  well-measured  segment  of  the  population  visits  the  other  country 
regularly (they are everyday transnationals) and even a larger portion is bicultural (see o. 
martnez 1994).  this sets a wider pattern in border interactions of acceptance of cultural 
and linguistic diversity and complexity.7 
the border conference sought to reassess and value positively these qualities of border 
culture.  cultural openness and creativity are always valuable assets.  but they become 
even more important as the societies and economies of north america become increasingly 
connected.  the vision of the border conferees is that this region can become an important 
source  of  bilingual,  bicultural,  and  transnationally  experienced  people.    investment  in 
education, such as improving formal communication skills among border residents, would 
enable  such  cultural  assets  to  be  used  in  more  effective  and  ample  ways.   the  border 
region and its people, rather than being seen as social and cultural problems, as violators of 
monolithic nationalism, should be seen as worthy in themselves and as important assets to 
the wider nation and continent.8  the conference participants envisioned two possible paths 
for border residents. one consists of narrowing and perhaps ceding the border to illegal 
businesses  and  the  enforcement  arms  of  the  central  government  locked  in  increasingly 
harsh and conflictive struggles for control. the other consists of the unleashing of creative 
potentials  in  biculturalism,  bilingualism,  and  transnationalism.    these  capacities,  so 
highly developed in the region, could place border-landers at the center of the continent 
in many positive dimensions, for trade, public safety, human security, cultural exchange, 
and international cooperation.  the border perhaps portends the future of much of the rest 
of the united states and mexico in facing a juncture between conflictive and cooperative 
alternatives.  a central question posed at the border conference was, which future will we 
develop?

constitutional and human rights for border residents
many  of  the  fundamental  rights  in  the  united  states  are  applicable  to  all  persons.  
this covers people of every citizenship and immigration status, and even visitors to the 
country.  clearly, it applies to people in the border region (many of whom are us citizens, 
of course).  fundamental human rights apply in all geographic locations.  however, the 

7  pablo vila (2000) has pointed out that widespread biculturalism at the border, especially in the united 
states, does not necessarily mean that border people lack national identifications or do not participate in 
polarizing narratives about the other country or about migrants.
8  this applies more generally to immigrants and their children (the second generation), and the border 
experience provides a useful window on that wider possibility.

70

journal on migration and human securityempty enforcement zone and border as extreme threat narratives tend to erase recognition 
of  these  rights.    securitization  prioritizes  central  state  imperatives  over  individual  and 
community  considerations;9  this  is,  of  course,  inconsistent  with  the  universal  nature  of 
fundamental rights.  the border conference discussed critically violations of rights such 
as warrantless stops, searches, seizures, and detentions on local roads, streets, and public 
spaces (outside authorized sites such as ports of entry) and racial profiling by the border 
patrol at checkpoints and on highways.  the participants expressed concern over cases 
of poorly controlled overlap between immigration and local law enforcement, and over 
poorly  supervised  use  of  force,  officer  conduct,  and  detention/removal  conditions  by 
federal border agencies.
the border conference emphasized that the communities of the us border region, totaling 
over seven million people, should be treated as subjects, people with full political and 
ethical standing, and not just objects of control or objects in the way of law enforcement. 
at a minimum, all persons in the region should be afforded core constitutional and human 
rights.  in addition, regional communities should have a voicemeriting serious attention
in border enforcement policies.  of course, all us citizens and residents should have a 
voice in political decisions.  but it is particularly important that the communities directly 
affected  by  government  activity,  with  detailed  knowledge  of  local  issues  and  realities, 
inform the development and implementation of federal laws and policies. for example, 
border community members have a great deal to offer in terms of real-world scenarios 
and issues in customs and border protection training.  such training should not be tightly 
controlled from the center, or substantially kept secret, but rather be positively informed 
and improved by border community knowledge and participation.  
broader  policies  similarly  should  reflect  border  perspectives,  such  as  issues  regarding 
dysfunctional  ports  of  entry  or  lack  of  need  for  further  enforcement  infrastructure 
between ports of entry.  the border region should not just be a backdrop that national 
media  and  politicians  occasionally  visit  while  promoting  centrally-driven  policies, 
but a place from which participatory knowledge and engagement begins, including the 
involvement of outstanding border region elected officials and community organizations.  
when the government invests substantial resources in border enforcement, this needs to 
be rendered accountable, in terms of fiscal responsibility and performance oversight.  it 
needs to be accountable both nationally and regionally.  however, security conceived in 
a  narrow  and  arguably  mistaken  way  as  mass  migration  enforcement  in  between  ports 
of  entry  remains  the  dominant  paradigm,  justifying  all  expenditures  and  operations  by 
federal enforcement agencies without reference to cost, effectiveness, or rights. the border 
conferees  emphatically  questioned  this  uncritical,  unsupervised  acceptance  of  massive 
central government expenditures, particularly between ports of entry, such as adding to 
the border fence-wall. in any event, local knowledge deserves inclusion in the national 
discussion about border policy.

conclusion
the people of the us border with mexico are not just objects of nationalistic narratives and 
central government policies, let alone non-existent beings in an empty zone exclusively 

9  on the concept of securitization applied to the border, see heyman 2012.

71

a voice of the us southwestern borderdedicated to security. border residents are subjects, with rights, a democratic responsibility 
to participate in governance, and valuable local knowledge.  the 2012 border conference in 
el paso, which brought together a remarkable cross-section of regional actors, developed 
this understanding across a variety of issues.  we critiqued the dominant narrative of the 
border as a site of danger focused on unauthorized immigration from mexico and central 
america, and the policies driven by that narrative of unselective, mass enforcement between 
ports of entry. yet we recognized the importance of safety and security for civilians in both 
nations, and as a result articulated an alternative vision of enforcement quality (dangerous 
actors) over quantity (mass migration).  that discussion led to a focus on the sites and issues 
related to potential criminal risk in the region, the triangular guns-drugs-money trade that 
passes through ports of entry.  we also took notice of the outstanding public safety record 
of the us side of the border, which not only puts into question the dominant border as 
threat  narrative,  but  also  draws  attention  to  the  sources  of  that  success,  keeping  local 
law enforcement out of federal immigration enforcement and maintaining good relations 
between  police  and  communities  with  many  immigrant  members.    we  also  addressed 
the lack of public safety on the mexican side of the border, and proposed that our major 
redirection of border security policy would be helpful in this regard.
the border region, we suggested, can move from the marginal edge to the center of a new 
north america. it can do so through its increasing importance as a mediating site between 
the united states and mexico, and drawing on its large stock of bicultural, bilingual, and 
binational people.  this brokerage skill is, of course, crucial to the increasingly integrated 
north american economy (albeit, an economy with considerable unevenness).  but it goes 
beyond instrumental uses of cultural and social resources.  border people and their cultural 
repertoire should and we think will in the future be viewed as a source of creativity and 
basis  for  positive  social  development,  turning  away  from  stigmatizing  views  of  closed 
and  monolithic  national  cultures.  the  border  conference  insisted  that  residents  of  the 
u.s.  side  of  the  border,  of  all  citizenship  and  immigration  statuses,  are  full  persons  in 
terms of constitutional and human rights, and that government operations must respect 
the rights, dignity, and physical safety of people in this region.  furthermore, principles 
of democratic participation point to an important role for border communities in oversight 
and accountability over central government institutions.
above all, the we the border: envisioning a narrative for our future conference staked 
out a vision of the border region as central to a positive future for the continent.  this vision 
is shared by a diverse variety of actors and sectors in the region, and across the nations of 
north america.

references
anderson, joan b., and james gerber.  2008.  fifty years of change on the u.s.-mexico 
border: growth, development, and quality of life.  austin, tx: university of 
texas press.

72

journal on migration and human securityandreas, peter. 2009.  border games: policing the u.s.-mexico divide, 2nd ed.  ithaca, 

ny: cornell university press.

border network for human rights.  2013.  the new ellis island: visions from the border 
for the future of america.  el paso, tx. http://www.scribd.com/doc/140208614/
the-new-ellis-island-visions-from-the-border-for-the-future-of-america.

chavez, leo r.  2001.  covering immigration: popular images and the politics of the 

nation.  berkeley and los angeles, ca: university of california press.

cq press.  2013.  city crime rankings 2013: rankings by population categories. 
 

http://os.cqpress.com/citycrime/2012/citycrime2013_
citycrimerankingsfactsheet.pdf. 

dunn, timothy j.  2009.  blockading the border and human rights: the el paso operation 

that remade immigration enforcement. austin, tx: university of texas press.

finklea, kristin m.  2013.  southwest border violence: issues in identifying and measuring 
spillover violence.  report r41075.  washington, dc: congressional research 
service.

flores, william vincent and rina benmayor.  1997.  latino cultural citizenship: claiming 

identity, space, and rights.  boston, ma: beacon press.

ganster, paul and david e. lorey.  2008.  the u.s.-mexican border into the twenty-first 

century.  lanham, md: rowman & littlefield.

ginsburg, susan. 2010. securing human mobility in the age of risk: new challenges for 

travel, migration, and borders. washington, dc: migration policy institute.

goddard, terry.  2011.  how to fix a broken border: a three part series.  washington, 
dc: immigration policy center. http://www.immigrationpolicy.org/perspectives/
how-fix-broken-border-three-part-series. 

heyman,  josiah  mcc.  1999.  why  interdiction?  immigration  law  enforcement  at  the 

united states-mexico border. regional studies 33(7): 61930.

.  2011.  guns, drugs, and money: tackling the real threats to border security. 
washington, dc: immigration policy center. http://www.immigrationpolicy.org/
perspectives/guns-drugs-and-money-tackling-real-threats-border-security.

. 2012.  constructing a perfect wall: race, class, and citizenship in u.s.-mexico 
border policing. in migration in the 21st century: ethnography and political 
economy, edited by winnie lem and pauline gardiner barber, 153-74. new york 
and london: routledge.

heyman, josiah mcc., and jason ackleson.  2009.  united states border security after 
september 11. in border security in the al-qaeda era, edited by john winterdyck 
and kelly sundberg, 37-74. boca raton, fl: crc press.

heyman, josiah mcc., and john symons.  2012.  borders. in a companion to moral 

anthropology, edited by didiez fassin, 540-57.  malden, ma: wiley-blackwell.

73

a voice of the us southwestern borderisacson, adam, and maureen meyer.  2012.  beyond the border buildup: security and 
migrants along the u.s.-mexico border.  washington, dc: washington office on 
latin america.  http://www.wola.org/files/beyond_the_border_buildup_final.
pdf.

leiken, robert s. and steven brooke. 2006. the quantitative analysis of terrorism and 
immigration: an initial exploration. terrorism and political violence 18: 503
21.

lydgate, joanna. 2010. assembly-line justice: a review of operation streamline. berkeley, 
ca: chief justice earl warren institute on law and social policy. http://www.law.
berkeley.edu/files/operation_streamline_policy_brief.pdf 

martnez, glenn a. 2006. mexican americans and language: del dicho al hecho.  tucson, 

az : university of arizona press.

martnez, oscar j.  1994.  border people: life and society in the u.s.-mexico borderlands.  

tucson, az: university of arizona press.

nevins,  joseph.  2002.  the  rise  of  the  illegal alien  and  the  making  of  the  us-mexico 

boundary. new york: routledge.

nevins, joseph.  2010.  operation gatekeeper and beyond: the war on illegals and the 

remaking of the u.s.-mexico boundary.  new york: routledge.

olson, eric, david a. shirk, and andrew selee, eds.  2010.  shared responsibility: u.s.-
mexico policy options for confronting organized crime.  washington, dc and 
san diego, ca: the woodrow international center for scholars and the trans-
border institute, university of san diego.

passel, jeffrey, dvera cohn, and ana gonzalez-barrera.  2012.  net migration from mexico 

falls to zeroand perhaps less.  washington, dc: pew hispanic institute.

rumbaut,  rubn  g.    2009.    undocumented  immigration  and  rates  of  crime  and 
imprisonment:  popular  myths  and  empirical  realities.  in  the  role  of  local 
police: striking a balance between immigration enforcement and civil liberties, 
edited by mary malina, appendix d.  washington dc: the police foundation.   
http://www.policefoundation.org/content/role-local-police-appendix-d.

san diego association of governments.  2006.  economic impacts of wait times at the 
san  diegobaja  california  border:  final  report.    san  diego  association  of 
governments  and  california  department  of transportation,  district  11.    http://
www.sandag.org/programs/borders/binational/projects/2006_border_wait_
impacts_report.pdf. 

santa  ana,  otto.  2002.    brown  tide  rising:  metaphors  of  latinos  in  contemporary 

american public discourse.  austin, tx: university of texas press.

74

journal on migration and human securitysimanski,  john,  and  lesley  m.  sapp.  2012.  immigration  enforcement  actions:  2011. 
washington,  dc:  department  of  homeland  security,  office  of  immigration 
statistics. 
http://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/immigration- 
statistics/enforcement_ar_2011.pdf. 

u.s.-mexico  border  and  immigration  task  force.    2008.    u.s.-mexico  border  policy 
report:  effective  border  policy:  security,  responsibility  and  human  rights  at 
the u.s.-mexico border. washington, dc: border network for human rights, the 
border action network, and the u.s.-mexico border and immigration task force. 
http://borderaction.org/web/resources/reports-publications/87-effective-border-
policy-security-responsibility-and-human-rights-at-the-us-mexico-border-2008.

.2009.  accountability, community security, and infrastructure on the u.s.-mexico 
border:  policy  priorities  for  2009-2010.  washington,  dc:  border  network 
for  human  rights,  the  border  action  network,  and  the  u.s.-mexico  border 
and  immigration  task  force.  http://borderaction.org/web/resources/reports-
publications/106-policy-priorities-for-2009-2010.

u.s. department of justice, national drug intelligence center.  2011.  national drug threat 
assessment 2011.  http://www.justice.gov/archive/ndic/pubs44/44849/44849p.pdf.
vila, pablo.  2000.  crossing borders, reinforcing borders: social categories, metaphors, 
and narrative identities on the u.s.-mexico frontier.  austin, tx: university of 
texas press.

. 2005.  border identifications: narratives of religion, gender, and class on the 

u.s.- mexico border.  austin, tx: university of texas press.

villarreal,  m.  angeles.    2012.    u.s.-mexico  economic  relations:  trends,  issues,  and 
implications.  report rl32934.  washington, dc: congressional research service.

75

a voice of the us southwestern border