problems faced by mexican 
asylum seekers in the united 
states

j. anna cabot
asylum and human rights clinic, university of connecticut

executive summary
violence in mexico rose sharply in response to president felipe calderns 
military  campaign  against  drug  cartels  which  began  in  late  2006.  as  a 
consequence,  the  number  of  mexicans  who  have  sought  asylum  in  the 
united  states  has  grown  significantly.  in  2013,  mexicans  made  up 
the  second  largest  group  of  defensive  asylum  seekers  (those  in  removal 
proceedings) in the united states, behind only china (eoir 2014b). yet 
between  2008  and  2013,  the  grant  rate  for  mexican  asylum  seekers  in 
immigration court fell from 23 percent to nine percent (eoir 2013, 2014b). 
this paper examinesfrom the perspective of an attorney who represented 
mexican asylum seekers on the us-mexico border in el paso, texasthe 
reasons for low asylum approval rates for mexicans despite high levels of 
violence in and flight from mexico from 2008 to 2013. it details the obstacles 
faced by mexican asylum seekers along the us-mexico border, including 
placement in removal proceedings, detention, evidentiary issues, narrow 
legal standards, and (effectively) judicial notice of country conditions in 
mexico.  the  paper  recommends  that  asylum  seekers  at  the  border  be 
placed  in  affirmative  proceedings  (before  immigration  officials),  making 
them eligible for bond. it also proposes increased oversight of immigration 
judges. 

introduction
over the past seven years, mexican citizens have faced escalating violence from organized-
crime  groups,  military,  and  government  officials.  many  have  fled  to  the  united  states 
seeking protection.  in the united states, they frequently endure prolonged detention and an 
asylum system that is unresponsive to the danger they have escaped. this paper discusses 
specific barriers faced by mexicans in the us asylum system from the perspective of an 
attorney who represented mexican asylum seekers on the us-mexico border in el paso, 
texas from 2011 to 2013. it addresses impediments to asylum at various stages of the 
process and makes recommendations on how the system can be reformed.  

 2014 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 2 number 4 (2014): 361-377the drug war in mexico
when felipe caldern was elected president of mexico in 2006, drug trafficking networks 
were well-established throughout the country (bonner 2012). almost immediately upon 
taking  office  caldern  initiated  a  war  on  drug  trafficking  and  violence  skyrocketed. 
calderns  highly  militarized  offensive  sought  to  target  the  leaders  of  drug  trafficking 
organizations  (dtos)  as  a  means  to  splinter  these  networks,  which,  in  turn,  created 
between  60  and  80  new  dtos  (the  guardian  2012). the  birth  of  new  dtos  kindled 
succession struggles and battles for territory (lee 2014).  the dtos expanded their reach 
into central america, and branched out into extortion and kidnapping (beittel 2013). it has 
been estimated that at least 120,000, and possibly more than 130,000, people were killed as 
a result of the drug war between 2007 and 2012 (molloy 2013). of these homicides, 11,400 
took place in ciudad jurez. the mexican government estimates that an additional 27,000 
people have officially disappeared. the rate of homicide grew from 24 per day in 2007 to 

75 per day in 2011 (ibid.).1 in 2011, according to some reports, mexican cities made up five 

of the top 10 most violent cities in the world, with ciudad jurez the highest at number two 
(seguridad, justicia y paz 2012). up to 220,000 people left their homes in ciudad jurez 
between 2007 and 2010, and some sources claim that 1.6 million people were internally 
displaced in mexico as of 2011 (internal displacement monitoring centre 2011). 
in  addition  to  the  violence  perpetrated  by  organized-crime  groups,  there  have  been 
pervasive  human  rights  violations  committed  by  the  military  and  police  forces  across 
mexico. complaints of torture and ill treatment by federal and military officers more than 
quadrupled between 2007 and 2011, according to the mexican national human rights 
commission  (cndh)  which  received  a  total  of  4,841  complaints  during  this  period 
(amnesty  international  2012).  these  reports  do  not  account  for  offenses  committed 
by  municipal  police  for  which  there  is  no  systematic  data  collected,  though  there  are 
approximately three times more non-federal officers in the country. widespread corruption 
amongst security forces and in the judicial sector, and the deference to military justice, has 
led to general impunity for human rights abuses (us department of state 2012). 
as  early  as  2008,  media  reports  described  mexico  as  susceptible  to  becoming  a  failed 
state, and united states lawmakers had begun to question its integrity and viability (abbott 
2011). the united states has contributed to the mexican conflict. ninety percent of illegal 

firearms in mexico come from the united states,2 and mexico is the united states number 
one supplier of marijuana, methamphetamine and cocaine.3 in june 2008 congress passed 

the mrida initiative, a three-year, $1.4 billion security assistance program to stem drug 
trafficking and organized crime in mexico, central america and the dominican republic 
1    the  numbers  are  reported  by  the  mexican  media  and  inegi,  mexicos  national  statistical agency. 
according to the justice in mexico project at the university of san diego, the number of deaths reported 
is often politicized and difficult to accurately ascertain due to empirical and methodological challenges in 
attempting to define and measure drug- and organized crime-related violence as a specific phenomenon 
(molzahn, rodrguez ferreira and shirk 2013).
2   ford, jess t. testimony before the subcommittee on the western hemisphere, committee on foreign 
affairs, house of representatives. firearms trafficking: us efforts to combat arms trafficking to mexico 
face planning and coordination challenges, 19 june 2009. http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d09781t.pdf. 
3   perkins, kevin l. and anthony p. placido. testimony before the  us  senate caucus on international 
narcotics  control,  5  may  2010.  http://www.fbi.gov/news/testimony/drug-trafficking-violence-in-mexico-
implications-for-the-united-states. 

362

journal on migration and human security(seelke and beittel 2009). in 2011, the obama administration pledged an additional $500 
million for that year (office of national drug control policy, n.d.). the priorities of the 
mrida initiative in mexico, which include further securing the southern us border and 
supporting  the  militarization  of  the  drug  war  in  mexico,  have  come  under  significant 
criticism  because  of  their  lack  of  any  measures  to  reduce  demand  for  drugs  or  supply 
of  illegal  weapons  (abbott  2011,  7).  furthermore,  only  15  percent  of  the  funding  was 
dependent on mexico meeting human rights standards (ibid., 8). 
despite  the  multi-year,  multi-national  and  multi-billion  dollar  intervention  to  combat 
drug trafficking, violence in mexico remains at a humanitarian crisis level. the number 
of homicides in 2012 was more than three times that of 2007. following the succession of 
enrique pea nieto as president of mexico in december 2012, initial data indicated nearly 
the same level of violence in the first seven months of 2013 (molloy 2013). the escalation 
of the drug war in mexico has had a brutally predictable effect: mexican people have fled 
the country and sought protection in the united states, canada and elsewhere. 

asylum claims brought by mexican citizens in the united 
states
us  asylum  claims  are  considered  in  two  different  ways. an  individual  may  apply  for 
asylum affirmatively if they have never been apprehended by immigration officials. in this 
process, the claimant files an application with the us citizenship and immigration services 
(uscis) asylum office within one year of entry. affirmative asylum seekers are given a 
non-adversarial interview with an asylum officer. individuals who have been apprehended 
by  immigration  officials  and  placed  in  removal  proceedings  must  apply  defensively. 
under this process, the claimant files an application with an immigration court and has a 
hearing before an immigration judge. 
the defensive process also applies to individuals who request asylum at or near a port of 
entry or border. persons apprehended at or near the border or who are stopped at a port-
of-entry face expedited removal unless they state an intention to apply for asylum or 
express a fear of return to their country or origin to a customs and border protection (cbp) 
official.  cbp must refer persons who satisfy this initial requirement to the asylum office 
for a credible fear interview.  in this interview, an asylum officer determines whether 
there is a significant possibility that they could establish eligibility for asylum before an 
immigration judge. if the claimant meets the credible fear standard, the case proceeds to a 
removal hearing in immigration court where the claimant can apply for asylum.   
earlier studies have pointed out the low mexican asylum filing numbers and approval rates 
during the early years of the drug war, as well as extremely high numbers of withdrawn 
asylum claims (kerwin 2012, 25).  in 2013, the rate at which all asylum seekers withdrew 
their cases was 17.5 percent, while the rate for mexican asylum seekers was 30.8 percent 
(eoir 2014a, 2014b).  it is difficult to account for this discrepancy precisely, but it is 
likely that some of the difficulties (described below) which mexican asylum seekers face 
in going through the system also function to pressure them to withdraw, including long 
and arbitrary periods of detention, lack of representation in high density areas and waiting 
years for hearings in non-detained courts due to backlogs. the withdrawal rate might also 

363

problems faced by mexican asylum seekers in the united statesbe disproportionate for mexican nationals for unrelated reasons like their ability to pursue 
immigration status through an alternative path.
in 2013 mexico was the second highest asylum seeker producing country, behind only 
china  (eoir  2014b;  unhcr  2014).    some  asylum  denials  can  be  attributed,  in  part, 
to narrow legal standards and the difficulty of sustaining claims based on the extortion, 
kidnapping,  and  homicides  by  criminal  organizations  (buchanan  2010).  still,  despite 
the dramatic increase in violence in mexico, the grant rate for mexican asylum claims 
adjudicated in immigration court plummeted from 23 percent to nine percent between 2008 
and 2013, and these numbers were, in turn, dwarfed by the numbers who withdrew their 

claims (eoir 2013, 2014b).4  

some  commentators  have  attributed  low  approval  rates  to  the  political,  military,  and 
economic ties between the united states and mexico, and what they view as bias against 
mexican asylum seekers reflected in political discourse, public opinion and media reports 
(campos and friedland 2014; burns 2011; lccref 2009). asylum determinations are 
strongly influenced by country conditions and human rights violations in sending countries 
(salehyan  and  rosenblum  2008).    the  asylum  claims  of  citizens  of  us  allies  have 
historically been more difficult to win than the claims of nationals from us government 
foes or ideological opponents (ibid., 106). asylum seekers from us trading partners have 
also had lower grant rates historically. 
recent  political  attacks  on  asylum  seekers,  particularly  those  subject  to  expedited 
removal,  have  focused  on  mexicans  and  central  americans  (campos  and  friedland 
2014).  politicians  and  media  outlets  have  spoken  out  against  mexican  asylum  seekers, 
calling them criminals and their asylum claims fraudulent (la jeunesse 2013). in response 
to a fox news article in august 2013 claiming that mexican asylum seekers are gaming 
the us immigration system, us senator jeff sessions (r-al) stated that the ability to seek 
asylum at the border was destroying border enforcement. he went on to say:

[w]hat we should say is, mexico is not a country that is persecuting people. its 
a democracy and if anybody claims theyre being persecuted, we ought to call the 
mexican  government  and  have  them  come  pick  them  up  and  protect  them  from 
persecution. how in the world can we determine if someone deep in mexico has had a 
run-in with a drug cartel? (poor 2013)

these viewpoints have no explicit or formal influence over the asylum system, but they 
may well influence immigration judges. indeed, a growing body of empirical research on 
disparities in asylum grant rates has found strong evidence of country-specific adjudicator 
bias  in  the  determinations  of  asylum  officers  and  immigration  judges  (rajmi-nogales, 
schoenholtz, and schrag 2007). 

4   a defensive asylum application is one that is filed with an immigration court after a noncitizen has been 
placed in removal proceedings. the immigration court grant rate presented in this paper is calculated as a 
percentage of all asylum claims decided in court for mexican asylum seekers on the merits (i.e., grants and 
denials).  not all asylum cases decided in immigration court originated as defensive claims. if an affirmative 
claim for asylum is not granted, then the case is referred to the immigration court. the grant rate statistics do 
not reflect the high rate which mexican asylum seekers withdraw their cases.

364

journal on migration and human securitythe asylum process
the  following  sections  describe  the  experience  of  mexican  asylum  seekers  at  various 
stages of the asylum process. 

entry
recent  focus  on  comprehensive  immigration  reform  has  cast  renewed  attention  on 
unauthorized migration. many asylum seekers from mexico enter the united states without 
authorization, but an increasing number simply go to the nearest port of entry to ask for 
humanitarian protection. the department of homeland security (dhs) reported that in 
the first three quarters of fy 2013 there were more than 14,000 credible fear claims at the 
border, in contrast to just under 7,000 for the whole of 2011 (skoloff 2013). this section 
addresses how asylum procedures at the border disadvantage mexican asylum seekers. 

defensive versus affirmative proceedings 

a  significant  systemic  problem  that  mexican  asylum  seekers  face  at  the  border  is  that 
they are placed in defensive, and not affirmative, asylum proceedings even if they have 
no  criminal  or  immigration  history. this  broad  rule  disproportionately  affects  mexican 
asylum seekers because of the large numbers of mexicans who seek asylum in this manner. 
defensive proceedings take longer than affirmative ones. defensive proceedings are more 
arduous and much more difficult to navigate without counsel. defensive proceedings also 
expend more of the governments time and resources. a fairer, less burdensome process 
would  simply  place  asylum  seekers  at  the  border  in  affirmative  proceedings.  asylum 
seekers with criminal histories or other potential bars would be transferred to immigration 
courts and there would be no greater risk of fraud than is already present in the system. 

interview procedures

persons seeking admission to the united states who express a fear of return to their country 
of origin are interviewed by cbp officers about their claim for asylum. mexican asylum 
seekers in this situation are often fleeing recent, traumatic events. the humanitarian crisis 
in mexico has hit the border areas particularly hard. the safest, closest place of refuge is 
often the united states for persons fleeing violence and many asylum seekers are able to 
reach the border within hours of experiencing violence and persecution. when an individual 
suffers trauma or violence, their ability to communicate and remember what happened to 
them  is  naturally  interrupted  (chaudhary  2010).  cbp  interviews  occur  under  oath,  are 
documented and asylum seekers must attest to their accuracy. once an asylum seeker has 
been released or detained, a uscis asylum officer administers a credible fear interview 
usually via videoconference. neither of these two interviews is recorded verbatim. they 
are both paraphrased or summarized by the officer who conducted the interview. 
interview procedures, which entail detailed statements, often lead to denied asylum claims 
based on credibility. this issue is discussed in more depth in the section on adjudication in 
immigration court. while immigration officials need to secure information from persons 

365

problems faced by mexican asylum seekers in the united statesseeking  protection,  the  interview  process  often  prejudices  the  asylum  seeker  without 
benefiting immigration and customs enforcement (ice) or cbp. eliminating repetition, 
being  more  sensitive  to  the  psychological  state  of  the  interviewee,  and  removing  the 
pressure of attesting to the complete accuracy of the statement, would benefit the process 
and lead to fairer and more informed decisions under the law.  

language and literacy

the interview procedures further jeopardize the rights of mexican asylum seekers who are 
illiterate or whose first language is not spanish. written documents are a central part of the 
border procedure, and illiterate asylum seekers are frequently pressured to sign documents 
without receiving a full explanation. this includes notes documenting their own interviews 
which have not been read back to them and which they have not had the opportunity to 
correct.
indigenous mexican asylum seekers are at a significant disadvantage. typically, members 
of  indigenous  groups  in  mexico  grow  up  speaking  an  indigenous  language  while  only 
having a rudimentary understanding of spanish. many cbp officers speak spanish, but 
often  neglect  to  provide  interpretation  services,  as  required,  for  non-spanish  speakers. 
when indigenous mexicans ask for asylum, cbp officers frequently interview them in 
spanish, leading to miscommunication between the border official and the asylum seeker 
and inaccuracies in the recorded interview. 
asylum seeker r.m., for example, had the misfortune of being both illiterate and a non-
native  spanish  speaker.  she  crossed  into  the  united  states  without  documentation  and 
was apprehended and interviewed by a cbp officer. despite the extreme difficulty she had 
speaking and understanding spanish, the officer did not secure an interpreter to conduct 
the interview in r.m.s native language. before the interview started, the officer failed to 
explain to r.m. her rights as required in a way she could understand. in the interview notes, 
the officer made significant mistakes, often using answers given by other members of the 
group with which r.m. was found, not her own group. at the end of the interview, the officer 
did not read the notes of the interview back to r.m., yet nonetheless made her attest to their 
accuracy. r.m. knew how to write her name, but not her initials, so the officer wrote her 
initials on a scrap of paper, and r.m. painstakingly wrote them at the bottom of each page 
of notes without knowing what the notes contained. at her immigration court proceedings, 
the  government  attorney  raised  the  issue  of  inconsistencies  between  her  testimony  and 
the cbp transcript, leading the immigration judge to question her credibility. providing 
interpretation services, greater oversight of cbp interviews, and verbatim transcripts of 
interviews would prevent bona fide refugees from being denied status. 

 rights violations

it is difficult to estimate the number of asylum seekers who have been illegally turned 
away at the border since this information has not been collected systematically. however, 
legal  practitioners  have  reported  that  some  asylum  seekers  have  been  threatened  with 
incarceration and separation from their family at the time they make a protection claim, 

366

journal on migration and human securitywhile others have been turned away by cbp officers who have told them that the united 
states is full. these responses highlight a disturbing fact: border agents have complete 
authority over asylum seekers at the point of entry, and violations are extremely difficult 
to remedy. 

detention
the  illegal  immigration  reform  and  immigrant  responsibility  act  of  1996  (iirira) 
created the expedited removal system, which provides immigration officials with the 
authority to remove summarily noncitizens who they encounter at or near the border who 
lack proper documents (kerwin 2012; keller et al. 2005). to prevent the summary removal 
of persons with bona fide protection claims, migrants who express a fear of returning to their 

country of origin are entitled to a credible fear interview.5 during this interview, an asylum 
race, religion, nationality, political opinion, or membership in a particular social group.6 

officer  asks  a  set  of  questions  to  determine  whether  there  is  a  significant  possibility 
that the migrant can demonstrate a fear of persecution on account of one of five grounds: 

immigrants in expedited removal proceedings are subject to mandatory detention, but those 
who are deemed to have a credible fear can be considered for release. a 1997 immigration 
and naturalization service (ins) memorandum provides that parole is a viable option and 
should be considered for aliens who meet the credible fear standard, can establish identity 
and community ties, and are not subject to any possible bars to asylum involving violence 

or misconduct.7

although  asylum  seekers  who  are  found  to  have  a  credible fear  may  be  released from 
detention, the standards for release are unreviewable and discretionary. this means that if 
an immigration officer feels that an asylum seeker is a flight risk, he or she can continue to 
be detained and the decision is not appealable. legal service providers on the border have 
observed the frequent practice of selective detention for mexican families whose members 
meet the credible fear standard and have no immigration or criminal history. a common 
scenario is to detain the father, but to release the rest of the family, which makes it very 
difficult for many families to sustain themselves and remain intact throughout the asylum 
process.  though  the  non-detained  adult  family  members  may  be  able  to  secure  work 
authorization, they frequently must care for young children and have fewer opportunities 
to secure employment than the detainee would. 
additionally, detained asylum seekers along the border are much less likely to be able to 
secure legal representation. not only is it difficult to afford representation, but immigration 
attorneys and organizations on the border are flooded with far more asylum seekers than 
they can represent. as numerous studies have demonstrated, asylum seekers with legal 
counsel prevail in their claims at far higher rates than those without representation (ramji-
nogales, schoenholtz, and schrag 2007). the us commission on international religious 

5   8 usc 1225(b)(1)(b)(5) (2004).
6   section 235(b)(1)(b)(v) of the immigration and nationality act.
7    immigration  and  naturalization  service  memorandum  from  michael a.  pearson,  executive associate 
commissioner for field operations, office of field operations, to regional directors, district directors, 
asylum office directors, expedited removal: additional policy guidance, 30 december 1997, reproduced 
in interpreter releases 75: 270 (1998).

367

problems faced by mexican asylum seekers in the united statesfreedom, for example, found that 25 percent of represented asylum seekers over a four-
year period who had been subject to expedited removal (arrested at or near the us-mexico 
border)  received  asylum,  versus  just  two  percent  in  unrepresented  cases  (kuck  2005, 
239).8 thus, it might be more accurate to say that, without counsel, asylum seekers cannot 
craft viable claims. detention also negatively influences asylum approval rates (kerwin 
2004). moreover, it concentrates asylum seekers in border communities. families typically 
do not move away from the border when a relative is in detention there. mexican asylum 
seekers, both detained and non-detained, are therefore heavily concentrated in the border 
region. given all of these factors, asylum seekers often withdraw or abandon their claims 
and chose to return home even if they possess a genuine fear of return. 
the  united  states  should  change  its  policy  of  discretionary  release,  and  instead  make 
release the norm and require justification to keep persons found to have a credible fear 
in detention. problems associated with the standards for release from detention could also 
be  addressed  by  greater  training  of  immigration  judges  and  judicial  review  of  custody 
decisions in these cases. 

reasonable fear interview procedures

if a noncitizen expresses a fear of persecution or torture but cannot apply for asylum due 
to a removal order or a prior removal, deportation, or exclusion order that is reinstated, 
they can apply for withholding of removal or relief under the convention against torture 
(cat). in these circumstances, they are entitled to a reasonable fear interview, which is 
a more rigorous standard but similar procedurally to a credible fear interview.  however, 
the  timeframes  in  which  the  two  interviews  are  conducted  vary  substantially.  in  2012, 
97.99 percent of all credible fear decisions were completed within 14 days (uscis asylum 
division 2012, credible fear fy 2009-fy 2012).  although the regulations require that 
reasonable fear determinations take place within 10 days,9 the average time for a reasonable 
fear decision in 2012 was 113 days (uscis asylum division 2012, questions and answers). 
mexican nationals had the largest share of the reasonable fear decisions in every month 
of 2012 (uscis asylum division 2012, credible fear and reasonable fear workloads). 
the fact that mexico and the united states share a border means that it is much more likely 
that people seeking asylum from mexico may have had a prior removal. 
because  of  the  reasonable  fear  procedures,  many  mexican  asylum  seekers  often  spend 
months in detention before they appear before an immigration judge. during this time, 
individuals cannot request a bond from a judge because they are not yet in immigration 
court proceedings, and they have no avenue for discretionary release because they have 
not received a reasonable fear decision. asylum seekers, especially those who have been 
persecuted or tortured by their own governments, often find detention to be intolerable. 
many suffer from post-traumatic stress disorder and detention re-traumatizes them. this 
can lead asylum seekers to give up on a genuine claim. furthermore, while asylum seekers 
wait  for  a  reasonable  fear  decision,  they  are  not  yet  listed  in  the  automated  executive 
8   a 2008 study by the united states government accountability office found that representation generally 
doubled the likelihood of affirmative and defensive cases being granted asylum, after controlling for other 
effects like nationality and immigration court location (gao 2008). 
9   8 cfr  208.31(b).

368

journal on migration and human securityoffice for immigration review system, making it very difficult for legal service providers 
to locate and represent them. 

access to counsel
despite the potential dangers of being deported to a country where they fear persecution, 
indigent  asylum  seekers  have  not  yet  been  determined  to  be  categorically  eligible 
for  government-funded  legal  counsel  (kerwin  2005).  difficulty  accessing  counsel  is 
exacerbated for asylum seekers in detention or expedited removal proceedings. because 
of the shortage of legal counsel, mexican asylum seekers experience notario fraud at high 
rates. in mexico, a notario is a qualified attorney, whereas in the united states a notary 
public  is  empowered  only  to  perform  such  duties  as  to  verify  identity,  make  certified 
copies, and administer oaths. the concentration of mexican asylum seekers at and near the 
border and the lack of affordable counsel leave them vulnerable to notary publics passing 
themselves off as qualified attorneys. these notarios not only take money from mexican 
asylum seekers under false pretenses, but often do harm to their asylum cases which cannot 
be remedied. since notarios or people who claim to be notaries are not attorneys, they are 
not subject to sanction by a bar association. in addition, it is often very difficult to convince 
law enforcement to prioritize or even pursue any of these cases. some jurisdictions have 
made efforts to educate asylum seekers and to encourage reporting and prosecuting these 
crimes,  but  these  efforts  need  to  be  greatly  increased. additionally,  the  procedure  for 
remedying the harm to the asylum seekers case by filing a motion to reopen should be 
simplified and expanded. notario fraud should also be added to the list of crimes for which 
an immigrant can get a u visa, a form of relief available for victims of criminal activity, 
considering the dire consequences that can arise from it. 

legal issues
among many problems in us asylum law, there are two legal issues that specifically affect 
mexican asylum seekers: the particular social group standard for asylum claims and the 
meaning  of  acquiescence  to  torture  in  torture  convention  claims  when  government 
agencies and officials do not uniformly support torture.  

particular social group

the 1951 convention relating to the status of refugees states that a refugees well-founded 
fear of persecution must be for reasons of race, nationality, religion, political opinion or 

membership in a particular social group.10 it is difficult for many mexican asylum seekers 

to  prove  that  the  persecution  they  fear  or  suffered  fits  within  one  of  the  five  grounds, 
though there are some cases, like those of human rights activists and journalists, which 
fit  squarely  into  the  refugee  definition  (harville  2012;  garcia  2011;  buchanan  2010). 
however, a significant number of mexicans seek protection because they resisted extortion 
or recruitment by gangs or cartels, and us asylum law can be unwelcoming to people in 
these situations (uchimiya 2013). particular social group claims under us law now require 

10   1951 convention relating to the status of refugees, art. 1(a)(2).

369

problems faced by mexican asylum seekers in the united statesparticularity (a discrete, often smaller group) and social visibility to the wider community.11 

these standards, which do not apply to any of the other grounds, make it more difficult to 
prevail in these claims (kerwin 2012).  
asylum seeker j.m. worked as an informant for the us drug enforcement administration 
(dea) in ciudad jurez. after many years, the jurez cartel discovered he was an informant 
and he had to flee for his life. despite his long service to them, dea agents reneged on their 

promise to assist him with an s visa, and so he applied for asylum.12 the immigration 

judge denied his request for asylum saying that the proposed social group of informants 
was not acceptable because the nature of an informant is to hide your identity and therefore 
the social group did not meet the visibility requirement. 

acquiescence to torture

immigration attorneys representing mexican asylum seekers often look to the possibility 
of relief under cat when asylum is not available to their client. withholding or deferral 
of removal under the convention requires a showing that a person will likely be tortured 
if returned to their country of origin. the torture need not be on account of one of the 
enumerated grounds of asylum. asylum requires that the persecutor either be the government 
or an entity that the government is unwilling or unable to control. by contrast, eligibility 
for cat relief requires that the pain or suffering be inflicted by or at the instigation of 
or with the consent or acquiescence of a public official or other person acting in official 

capacity.13  

the most substantial barrier to cat relief stems from the fact that governments, especially 
in  times  of  crisis,  do  not  act  monolithically.  in  mexico,  corruption  is  endemic  and 
frequently  government  agencies  and  officials  work  at  cross  purposes.  us  asylum  laws 
and  regulations,  however,  do  not  explicitly  instruct  judges  about  how  to  address  these 
situations. immigration judges sometimes become confused when, for example, municipal 
police might be trying to prevent torture, but the army is perpetrating it. the situation can 
become more obscure if the municipal police are trying to prevent torture, but the army 
knows of torture and is acquiescing to it. in both of these situations, judges have denied 
cat relief on the basis that there are elements of the mexican government that are trying 
to  prevent  torture.  judges  have  said  that  because  of  the  efforts  of  a  discrete  branch  of 
government, the government (as a whole) cannot be acquiescing to torture. in addition, 
government perpetrators are often treated as rogue officers. the idea of a rogue officer, 
in particular, is contrary to the us civil rights definition of acts under color of law. 

11   see matter of m-e-v-g-, 26 i. & n. dec. 227 2014 wl 524499 (b.i.a. 2014); matter of w-g-r-, 26 i. & 
n. dec 208 2014 wl 524498 (b.i.a. 2014). 
12   s visas are awarded to immigrants who work as informants for us law enforcement agencies.
13   convention against torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, art. 1., 
dec.10 1984, 1465 u.n.t.s. 85, art. 1., 8 c.f.r.  208.18.

370

journal on migration and human securityadjudication in immigration court
once mexican asylum seekers reach immigration courts, they confront additional barriers 
in the form of lack of procedural rules, negative credibility decisions, and judicial notice 
of  country  conditions  in  mexico. additionally,  long  delays  in  non-detained  courts  can 
push mexicans who apply for asylum affirmatively beyond the one-year filing deadline, 
a procedural rule requiring that asylum seekers file their applications within one year of 
arriving in the united states unless  extraordinary or changed circumstances can be found 

to warrant a delay.14 

lack of procedural and evidentiary rules

federal rules of evidence and procedure do not apply to the hearings of asylum seekers. 
immigration courts are adjudicatory entities, but not independent courts constituted under 
article  1  of  the  us  constitution. though  the  immigration  court  practice manual  and 
the  immigration  judge  benchbook  and  other  publications  attempt  to  make  procedure 
in  immigration  courts  uniform  and  predictable,  those  guidelines  are  not  binding.  the 
immigration  court  practice  manual  says  explicitly  in  the  opening  chapter  that,  the 
requirements set forth in this manual are binding on the parties who appear before the 
immigration courts, unless the immigration judge directs otherwise in a particular case 
[emphasis added] (office of the chief immigration judge 2013). 
there  is  no  coherent  set  of  rules  for  immigration  courts.  immigration  courts  are  not 

bound by the strict code of evidence;15 instead, relevance and fundamental fairness are the 
only bars to admissibility.16 the immigration court practice manual also states that for 
detained individual hearings, filing deadlines are specified by the immigration court.17 this 

procedural flexibility allows immigration judges to influencefor better or worsethe 
outcome of asylum hearings. denial of asylum based on unfair procedures is very difficult 
to challenge at the appellate level. 

judicial discretion regarding credibility findings

in the wake of the real id act of 2005, the testimony of an asylum seeker may be 
sufficient to sustain the applicants burden without corroboration, but only if the applicant 
satisfies the trier of fact that the applicants testimony is credible, is persuasive, and refers 

to specific facts sufficient to demonstrate that the applicant is a refugee.18 the ability of 

an asylum seeker to corroborate a claim can be very difficult, especially if agents of that 
government were involved in the persecution or torture. in addition, securing affidavits in 
the mail from witnesses in war-torn countries can be extremely slow, if not impossible. 

14   ina 208(a)(2)(b); 8 cfr 208.4(a)(2) and 1208(a)(2).
15   matter of wadud, 19 i&n 182 (bia 1984).
16   matter of ponce-hernandez, 22 i&n 784 (bia 1999); matter of toro, 17 i&n dec. 340 (bia 1980).
17   immigration court practice manual, 3.1(b)(ii)(b); perkins, kevin l. and anthony p. placido. testimony 
before the us senate caucus on international narcotics control, 5 may 2010. http://www.fbi.gov/news/
testimony/drug-trafficking-violence-in-mexico-implications-for-the-united-states. 
18   8 usc 1158(b)(1)(b)(ii).

371

problems faced by mexican asylum seekers in the united statesan  immigration  judge  may  consider  a  variety  of  factors  when  making  a  credibility 
determination: 

[t]he demeanor, candor, or responsiveness of the applicant or witness, the inherent 
plausibility  of  the  applicants  or  witnesss  account,  the  consistency  between  the 
applicants  or  witnesss  written  and  oral  statements  (whenever  made  and  whether 
or  not  under  oath,  and  considering  the  circumstances  under  which  the  statements 
were made), the internal consistency of each such statement, the consistency of such 
statements with other evidence of record (including the reports of the department of 
state on country conditions), and any inaccuracies or falsehoods in such statements, 
without regard to whether an inconsistency, inaccuracy, or falsehood goes to the heart 

of the applicants claim, or any other relevant factor.19

all of these factors can lead to denials. for example, the demeanor of an asylum seeker 
might be misjudged by an immigration judge because of cultural differences or trauma. in 
other cases, a judge might doubt the plausibility of particularly horrific treatment because 
they have not heard similar stories or entertained similar claims in the past. 
many  mexican  asylum  seekers  are  in  defensive  proceedings  either  because  they  asked 
for asylum at the border or asked for asylum after being apprehended in the united states 
without immigration status. these individuals have had either a credible fear or reasonable 
fear interview with an asylum officer, frequently by video conference. almost all of them 
have also had a long in-depth interview with a cbp official, either at the border or when 
they were arrested. as noted previously, these first interviews frequently occur within days 
or hours of an initial trauma that causes the asylum seeker to flee his or her home. this 
means that there are two detailed accounts of what happened to the asylum seeker already 
on the record before the individual asylum hearing. under the real id act credibility 
provisions, any inconsistencies between the statements, or the statements and the testimony 
provided in court, can legitimately be used by the immigration judge to make a negative 
credibility decision. 
an applicant for cat relief, d.t., fled from his home in chihuahua with his family after 
being shot in the arm by a member of the military. his wife had been beaten so badly that 
she miscarried. the family fled to the us border and, from there, was taken directly to a 
hospital where d.t. was cleaned up and given strong pain medication. he was then returned 
to the border for his initial interview. in that interview he stated that the soldiers came to 
his house in black trucks. d.t. was detained and his family was released, a not uncommon 
outcome. he later received a reasonable fear interview where he said that he thought the 
trucks were dark green and dusty, but it was hard to make out their color. despite all the 
other points of consistency in his statements and testimony, his medical records, and his 
traumatized state when he gave the first statement, the judge used this specific discrepancy 
to make a negative credibility determination and deny d.t. deferral of removal under cat. 
the cbp and uscis practice of taking multiple detailed and sworn statements effectively 
gives immigration judges broad discretion to deny claims.  few people can tell a detailed 
story three times in the exact same way, especially when stressed, traumatized or injured, or 
if the recitations are months or years apart. inconsistencies naturally occur and the real 
19   8 usc 1158(b)(1)(b)(iii).

372

journal on migration and human securityid act provisions give immigration judges free rein to use these inconsistencies if they are 
inclined to issue a negative decision.
in cases where an immigration judges credibility decision seems unreasonable and derails 
a clients case, appealing to the board of immigration appeals is not a viable solution. first, 
immigration judges have broad discretion on credibility decisions.  thus, the immigration 
judge in the case of d.t. was well within his rights to make that decision. second, even 
if the asylum seeker can present other evidence that buttresses his or her testimony and 
can contradict a negative credibility decision, findings of fact (as on credibility) can be 

reviewed only to determine whether [they] are clearly erroneous.20 immigration judges 

should be able to decide credibility based on a wide range of factors.  however, the decision 
should be reasonable, justified and subject to meaningful review. 

judicial bias in country of origin information

empirical research on disparities in asylum grant rates has found evidence of country-
specific  adjudicator  bias  (rajmi-nogales,  schoenholtz,  and  schrag  2007).  country  of 
origin  bias  can  be  a  particular  problem  for  mexican  asylum  seekers  when  it  comes  to 
educating immigration judges about the situation in mexico. generally, it is difficult to 
educate  an  immigration  judge  on  country  conditions  because  of  the  limited  amount  of 
time that they have to commit to each case. however, asylum seekers from mexico have 
a different problem. immigration judges in us-mexico border communities often think 
that they already know about conditions in mexico because of its proximity. however, in 
reality, many have only a passing, informal knowledge of the country. immigration judges 
need to be deliberately and thoughtfully educated about the situation in mexico so that 
incomplete or inaccurate information gained from the media or other less reliable sources 
is not the context for their decision making. 

backlogged immigration courts

another problem for defensive asylum seekers is the massive backlog of cases in immigration 
courts. according to the transactional records access clearinghouse, cases have been 
pending in immigration court for an average of more than 500 days (trac 2014). in el 
paso, texas, initial master calendar hearingscase status hearings which take place before 
the hearing on the meritsare being scheduled up to four years into the future. though 
mexican asylum seekers who are paroled into the united states can obtain work permits 
immediately under the paroled in the public interest category, those who are released on 
their own recognizance or are bonded out of detention have to wait for years without being 
able to file their asylum applications and start the clock for employment authorization as 
asylum seekers. additionally, people have to live for years in limbo while they wait for 
their cases to lumber through the immigration courts. 

20   8 c.f.r.  1003.1(d)(3)(i) (2011)

373

problems faced by mexican asylum seekers in the united statesconclusion
mexican asylum seekers on the border encounter procedural, practical, political and legal 
barriers to asylum from the time they encounter immigration officials until a determination 
is made on their claim. as a result, mexican asylum claims are weeded out and few are 
granted.  low us asylum approval rates for mexicans persist despite a significant quantity 
of filings from 2008 to 2013, over which time period an estimated 120,000, and possibly 
more than 130,000, people were killed as a result of the drug war (molloy 2013). in the 
midst of a humanitarian crisis in mexico, the united states should take particular care to 
live up to its obligations under international law and make its asylum procedures fair and 
consistent in these cases. 

references
abbott, philip k. 2011. the merida initiative: a flawed counterdrug policy? small wars 
journal,  january  6.  http://smallwarsjournal.com/jrnl/art/the-merida-initiative-a-
flawed-counterdrug-policy

amnesty  international.  2012.  known  abusers,  but  victims  ignored:  torture  and  ill-
treatment  in  mexico.  london:  amnesty  international.  http://amnesty.org/en/
library/asset/amr41/063/2012/en/74354a01-4946-4301-b922-8d048782bfef/
amr410632012en.pdf. 

beittel, june s. 2013. mexicos drug trafficking organizations: source and scope of the 
violence.  crs  report  for  congress  r41576.  washington,  dc:  congressional 
research service. http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/row/r41576.pdf. 

bonner, robert c. 2012. the cartel crackdown. foreign affairs 91(3): 12-15. 
buchanan, holly. 2010. fleeing the drug war next door: drug-related violence as basis 
for refugee protection for mexican asylum-seekers. merkourios 27(72): 28-60. 
burns, melinda. 2011. why mexican immigrants cant get ahead. pacific standard, 
http://www.psmag.com/navigation/business-economics/why-

december 
mexican-immigrants-cant-get-ahead-38555/ 

22. 

campos,  sara  and  joan  friedland.  2014.  mexican  and  central  american  asylum  and 
credible fear claims: background and context. special report. washington, dc: 
american immigration council. http://www.immigrationpolicy.org/special-reports/
mexican-and-central-american-asylum-and-credible-fear-claims-background-and-
context. 

chaudhary, jessica. 2010. memory and its implications for asylum decisions. journal 

of health and biomedical law 6: 37-63.

department of state. 2012. mexico 2012 human rights report. country reports for human 
rights practices. washington, dc: us department of state bureau of democracy, 
human  rights  and  labor.  http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/204674.
pdf. 

374

journal on migration and human securityeoir (executive office for immigration review). 2013. fy 2012 statistical yearbook. 
prepared by the office of planning, analysis, and technology. washington, dc: 
us department of justice. http://www.justice.gov/eoir/statspub/fy12syb.pdf

. 2014a. fy 2013 statistical yearbook. prepared by the office of planning, analysis, 
and technology. washington, dc: us department of justice. http://www.justice.
gov/eoir/statspub/fy13syb.pdf. 

.  2014b.  immigration  courts  asylum  statistics  fy  2009-2013.  prepared  by  the 
office of planning, analysis, and technology. washington, dc: us department of 
justice.  http://www.justice.gov/eoir/efoia/fy2009-fy2013asylumstatisticsbynat
ionality.pdf 

garcia,  sergio.  2011.  asylum  for  former  mexican  police  officers  persecuted  by  the 

narcos. boston college third world law journal 31: 235-267.

gao (government accountability office). 2008. significant variation existed in asylum 
outcomes  across  immigration  courts  and  judges.  report  to  congressional 
requesters  gao-08-940.  washington,  dc:  government  accountability  office. 
http://www.gao.gov/assets/290/281794.pdf.

the  guardian.  2012.  mexicos  war  on  cartels  made  drug  crisis  worse,  says  new 
government,  december  19,  2012.  http://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/
dec/19/mexico-government-condemns-calderon-war-drugs.

harville, benjamin h. 2012. ensuring protection or opening the floodgates?: refugee 
law and its application to those fleeing drug violence in mexico. georgetown 
immigration law journal 27: 135-185.

internal displacement monitoring centre. 2011. mexico: displacement due to criminal and 
communal violence. geneva: norwegian refugee council. http://www.internal-
displacement.org/assets/library/americas/mexico/pdf/mexico-november-2011.
pdf. 

keller, allen, andrew rasmussen, kim reeves and barry rosenfeld. 2005. evaluation of 
credible fear referral in expedited removal at ports of entry in the united states. 
in  report  on asylum  seekers  in  expedited  removal:  volume  ii  expert  reports, 
1-44. washington, dc: us commission on international religious freedom. http://
www.uscirf.gov/reports-briefs/special-reports/reportasylum-seekers-in-expedited-
removal.

kerwin, donald. 2004. charitable legal programs for immigrants: what they do, why 
they matter and how they can be expanded. immigration briefings no. 04-6:1-
12.

______. 2005. revisiting the need for appointed counsel. washington, dc: migration 
policy  institute.  http://www.migrationpolicy.org/sites/default/files/publications/
insight_kerwin.pdf.  

_______. 2012. the faltering us refugee protection system: legal and policy responses 

375

problems faced by mexican asylum seekers in the united statesto refugees, asylum-seekers, and others in need of protection.  refugee survey 
quarterly 31(1):1-33. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/rsq/hdr019

kuck,  charles.  2005.  legal  assistance  for  asylum  seekers  in  expedited  removal: 
a  survey  of alternative  practices.  in  report  on  asylum  seekers  in  expedited 
removal: volume ii  expert reports, 232-281. washington, dc: us commission 
on  international  religious  freedom.  http://www.uscirf.gov/sites/default/files/
resources/stories/pdf/asylum_seekers/ers_rptvolii.pdf 

la  jeunesse,  william.  2013.  agencies  buying  hotel  rooms  for  surge  of  mexican 
illegal immigrants, others released. fox news, august 12. www.foxnews.com/
us/2013/08/12/surge-mexican-illegal-immigrants-claiming-asylum-overwhelms-
border-officials/.

lccref  (the  leadership  conference  on  civil  rights  education  fund).  2009.  the 
state  of  hate:  escalating  hate  violence  against  immigrants.  in  confronting 
the new faces of hate: hate crimes in america, 14-16. washington, dc: the 
leadership  conference  on  civil  rights  education  fund.  http://www.civilrights.
org/publications/hatecrimes/escalating-violence.html. 

lee, brianna. 2014. mexicos drug war. backgrounders. new york: council on foreign 

relations. http://www.cfr.org/mexico/mexicos-drug-war/p13689#p3.

molloy, molly. 2013. the mexican undead: toward a new history of the drug war 
killing  fields.  small  wars  journal,  august  21.  http://smallwarsjournal.com/
jrnl/art/the-mexican-undead-toward-a-new-history-of-the-%e2%80%9cdrug-
war%e2%80%9d-killing-fields. 

molzahn,  cory,  octavia  rodriguez  ferreira  and  david a.  shirk.  2013.  drug  violence 
in  mexico:  data  and  analysis  through  2012.  san  diego:  trans-border 
institute  university  of  san  diego.  http://justiceinmexico.files.wordpress.
com/2013/02/130206-dvm-2013-final.pdf.

office of the chief immigration judge. 2013 [last revised]. immigration court practice 
http://www.justice.gov/eoir/vll/ocijpracmanual/practice_manual_

manual. 
review.pdf#page=9.

office of national drug control policy. n.d.mexico. http://www.whitehouse.gov/ondcp/

mexico.

poor, jeff. 2013. jeff sessions: us policy handling asylum seekers at mexican border 
unbelievable,  mindless.  the  daily  caller,  august  13.  http://dailycaller.
com/2013/08/13/jeff-sessions-us-policy-handling-asylum-seekers-at-mexican-
border-unbelievable-mindless/ 

ramji-nogales,  jaya,  andrew  i.  schoenholtz  and  philip  g.  schrag.  2007.  refugee 
roulette: disparities in asylum adjudication. stanford law review 60 (2): 295-
412.

salehyan, idean and mark r. rosenblum. 2008. international relations, domestic politics, 

376

journal on migration and human securityand asylum admissions in the united states. political research quarterly 61(1): 
104-121. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1065912907306468

seelke, clare r. and june s. beittel. 2009. merida initiative for mexico and central america: 
funding and policy issues. crs report for congress r40135. washington, dc:  
us congressional research service.

seguridad  justicia  y  paz.  2012.  san  pedro  sula,  la  ciudad  ms  violenta  del  mundo; 
jurez, la segunda, january 11. http://www.seguridadjusticiaypaz.org.mx/sala-de-
prensa/541-san-pedro-sula-la-ciudad-mas-violenta-del-mundo-juarez-la-segunda. 
skolof,  brian.  2013.  asylum-seekers  at  southwest  us  border  double.  albuquerque 
journal,  august  18.  http://www.abqjournal.com/249170/news/asylumseekers-at-
southwest-us-border-double.html.

trac (transactional records clearing house). 2014. average time pending cases have 
been waiting in immigration courts. syracuse, ny: syracuse university. http://
trac.syr.edu/phptools/immigration/court_backlog/apprep_backlog_avgdays.php

uchimiya, diane. 2013. falling through the cracks: gang victims as casualties in current 

asylum jurisprudence. berkeley la raza law journal 23: 109-162.

unhcr  (united  nations  high  commissioner  for  refugees).  2014.  unhcr  asylum 
trends  2013.  geneva:  unhcr.  http://www.unhcr.ch/fileadmin/user_upload/
dokumente/06_service/zahlen_und_statistik/unhcr_asylum_levels_and_
trends2013released.pdf.

uscis  asylum  division.  2012.  asylum  division  quarterly  stakeholder  meeting, 
december 6. washington, dc:  us citizenship and immigration services (uscis) 
asylum  division.  http://www.uscis.gov/outreach/notes-previous-engagements/
asylum-division-quarterly-stakeholder-meeting-3. 

377

problems faced by mexican asylum seekers in the united states