book review 
diaspora lobbies and the us 
government: convergence and 
divergence in making foreign policy
by josh dewind and renata segura, eds. new york, ny: 
social science research council and new york university 
press, 2014. 320 pages.
thomas ambrosio
north dakota state university

remain, 

while  concerns  about  the  loyalties  of 
hyphenated  americans 
the 
widespread acceptance of multiculturalism 
in  american  society  has 
legitimized 
activities  by  ethnic  groups  to  advocate 
within the us political system on behalf of 
their country of origin and its interests. this 
phenomenon is not new, but it has received 
heightened  scholarly  attention  since  the 
end  of  the  cold  war  for  three  reasons. 
first, given the level of american power, 
the united states has fewer constraints on 
its  actions  on  the  international  stage  and 
therefore  its  internal  sources  of  conduct 
are  more  important    interest  groups  of 
all  types  could  potentially  influence  us 
foreign  policy  to  a  greater  degree  than 
before.  second,  the  united  states  highly 
diverse  ethnic  composition  means  that 
nearly every event outside the country has 
an impact on at least some of its citizens; 
moreover,  there  are  a  multitude  of  ethnic 
groups vying for influence over us foreign 
policy. this diversity and mobilization has 
increased over the past few decades. lastly, 
the  decentralized  nature  of  the american 
political  system  (and,  in  particular,  the 
us  congress)  allows  for  multiple  points 
of  entry  into  the  policy-making  process, 

which, in turn, grants these groups greater 
influence.  ethnic  interest  groups  are  a 
core part of this system and they must be 
taken into account when seeking to explain 
american foreign policy.

our  understanding  of  ethnic  group 
influence  on  the american  foreign  policy 
process  remains  tentative,  however.  this 
is,  in  part,  because  there  are  many  ways 
to  approach  this  issue.  these  include  the 
following:  taking  the  concepts  of  more 
general  interest  group  influence  on  us 
policy  (either  domestic  or  foreign)  and 
applying them to this specific type of group; 
adopting a process tracing methodology to 
demonstrate how the activities of an ethnic 
lobby  have  effected  policy  outcomes;  
endeavoring  to  determine  how  influential 
these  groups  actually  are  on  the  policy 
process through survey data or quantitative 
analysis; understanding the circumstances 
in  which  these  groups  are  more  or  less 
effective in relation to rival interest groups;  
focusing  on  the  relationship  between  the 
ethnic group and its homeland; and a more 
normative  argument  about  the  relative 
benefits  and  dangers  of  such  influence 
on  american  national  security  interests. 

 2015 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 3 number 3 (2015): 280-282the  plus  side, 

like  the  american  political  system,  this 
diversity 
is  necessary,  but  sometimes 
comes at the expense of coherence as some 
of  the  best  studies  talk  past  each  other, 
dealing with different aspects of the same 
topic. nonetheless, there is still room in the 
literature  for  a  fresh  approach.  diaspora 
lobbies and the us government, edited by 
josh  dewind  and  renata  segura,  makes 
such  a  contribution  through  its  focus  on 
policy  convergence/divergence  between 
the  us  government  and  ethnic  interest 
groups, though it is hampered by an uneven 
application and a lack of focus in some of 
its chapters.
on 
the  concept  of 
convergence/divergence  of  policy  aims 
and its impact on both us foreign policy 
and  the  ethnic  groups  activities  is  quite 
good,  even  if  underdeveloped  in  the 
volumes introduction. in essence, it is an 
acknowledgment  that  there  is  a  dynamic 
and  interactive  process  by  which  the 
government can influence or utilize ethnic 
interest  groups  for  its  own  ends  just  as 
much  as  ethnic  interest  groups  seek  to 
influence  and  utilize  the  government  for 
theirs. moreover, it recognizes that neither 
the us government nor the ethnic groups in 
question are monolithic, and therefore this 
convergence/divergence  equation  might 
become  quite  complicated  as  divisions 
within both sides can create opportunities 
for  effecting  policy  outcomes.  both  of 
these points are important to furthering our 
understanding  of  policy  outcomes,  ethnic 
group  activities,  and  the  groups  relative 
influence in the process.
this  dynamic  and 
interactive  process 
is  productively  examined  in  several  of 
this  books  chapters,  especially  in  the 
contributions  by  lyons  and  vanderbush, 
who 
iraq, 
respectively.    in  the  first  case,  the  sharp 

looked  at  ethiopia  and 

the  us 
policy  divergence  between 
government  and  the  ethiopian-american 
lobby  caused  the  latter  to  largely  cease 
attempting  to  influence  the  former,  and 
instead to seek a direct impact on ethiopian 
politics.  vanderbush  examines  how  a 
faction within the us government (which 
sought to remove saddam hussein) entered 
into  a  mutually  beneficial  relationship 
with iraqi exiles to, in effect, capture the 
us  foreign  policy  debate  on  iraq  in  the 
post-9/11  context.  other  chapters,  too, 
contextualize  this  dynamic  through  their 
own  case  studies.  thompsons  chapter 
on  northern  ireland  demonstrates  how 
divergence can be turned into convergence 
through  having  key  us  politicians  of  a 
particular  ethnic  group  seek  to  shift  the 
policy  debate.  eriksons  examination  of 
the haitian diaspora shows how an external 
event (the 2010 earthquake) can radically 
change  the  dynamic  between  the  us 
government  and  an  ethnic  group.  finally, 
smith  contributes  a 
largely  historical 
account of ethnic group lobbying and us 
foreign policy (though it is oddly placed as 
the conclusion of the volume) and it deals 
with  the  issue  of  convergence/divergence 
in broad strokes.
yet some of the other chapters either do not 
fit so well with the theme of convergence/
divergence or lack a specific focus on this 
dynamic.  for  example,  sheffers  piece, 
though interesting in-and-of itself, seems out 
of place. it is primarily about establishing a 
typology between different types of groups 
(transnational  communities  versus  ethno-
national  diasporas)  and  outlining  their 
characteristics and activities. it gives short 
shrift  to  the  central  dynamic  outlined  in 
the  introduction.  shain  and  ragachevsky 
examine the divergence within the jewish-
american  community  between  traditional 
supporters  of  israeli  interests  and  more 

281

book review: diaspora lobbies and the us governmentfurther, 

to  critics  of 

liberal  sentiments  within  this  community 
that  are  more  interested  in  peace  than 
israels  security.  taken 
this 
chapter  could  have  looked  at  the  very 
interesting  and  complicated  situation  in 
which the matter of us support for israel is 
increasingly  becoming  a  partisan  issue  to 
the point where we are seeing divergence 
within  both  the  broader  population  and 
the  jewish-american  community.  this 
is leading to a split convergence between 
the  holders  of  the  traditional  concept  of 
us-israel  relations  (e.g.,  aipac)  and 
republicans/conservatives,  on 
the  one 
hand,  and  between  j  street  and  the 
democrats/liberals on the other. thus, we 
are seeing both divergence and convergence 
on  multiple  levels.  unfortunately,  shain 
and  ragachevsky  get  sidetracked  into 
responding 
the  jewish 
lobby and by making a largely normative 
argument about the continuing importance 
of israel for american jews. prez tackles 
cuban-american influence on us foreign 
policy  and  provides  a  good,  historical 
overview  of  the  convergence  between 
the cuban exiles and american cold war 
policy.  however,  his  contribution  would 
have  been  improved  by  a  greater  focus 
on more recent policy changes, as well as 
on  the  events  of  the  past  decade,  which 
have  caused  more  partisan  divergence  on 
the  issue  of  cuba  (similar  in  some  ways 
to  the  divide  over  support  for  israel). 
finally, bamyehs piece on the palestinians 
contends  that  us  foreign  policy  vis--
vis  israel-palestine  is  wrong  from  both  a 
moral  and  interests-based  perspective.  it 
(unfortunately and unironically) submits to 
the theory of everything fallacy outlined 
by  shain  and  ragachevsky,  which  sees 
the hand of the israeli lobby behind nearly 
every us foreign policy decision, ignoring 
the  actual  and  legitimate  convergence 
between  israel  and  the  united  states  in 

terms of values and strategic outlook.
despite  its  failings,  this  volume,  overall, 
makes  an  important  contribution  to  the 
field  in particular, for the questions that 
it raises for future research. for example, 
what are the consequences on us foreign 
policy when a seemingly monolithic group 
ceases to be monolithic in terms of its policy 
goals, such as amongst jewish americans? 
under  these  conditions,  we  have  a  case 
of  both  convergence  and  divergence 
with  us  foreign  policy,  which  creates  an 
opportunity for political entrepreneurs both 
from the groups themselves and from the 
overall  political  system  to  exploit  these 
differences in line with their own interests 
and values. additionally, how are changes 
in  the  convergence/divergence  spectrum 
effected? and  what  are  the  consequences 
of such changes both for us foreign policy 
and on the group?  research on these topics 
can be conducted either within the context 
of these groups (e.g., through additional and 
possibly  comparative  case  studies)  or  by 
examining them within the larger context 
of policy change. regardless of the focus, 
studying  change  can  provide  important 
insights into other areas of the overarching 
study  of  ethnic  lobbies  and  us  foreign 
policy.  lastly,  the  issue  of  convergence 
and divergence does not take place solely 
within the context of the us foreign policy 
process, but also affects american relations 
with other countries. how does this affect 
the two-level game of internal politics and 
external  diplomacy?  thompsons  chapter 
on northern ireland, for example, could be 
followed up by examining how changes in 
us policy toward northern ireland affected 
its relations with great britain.
in  short,  this  is  a  good,  albeit  uneven, 
edited  volume  which  should  be  read  by 
scholars  of  ethnic  group  influence  on  us 
foreign policy.

282

journal on migration and human security