rethinking the assumptions 
of refugee policy: beyond 
individualism to the challenge of 
inclusive communities

george rupp
columbia university

executive summary
the  values  of  individualism  developed  in  the  post-enlightenment  west 
are  at  the  core  of  the  contemporary  refugee  protection  system.  while 
enormously  powerful,  this  tradition  assigns  priority  to  the  individual 
as distinguished from the community. based on patterns established in 
centuries of religious thought and practice as well as on the insights of key 
thinkers in the tradition of western individualism, this paper argues that 
consideration of communities should receive greater emphasis. in terms 
of the refugee protection system, this shift requires examining how best to 
address the needs of communities that are uprooted, as well as the needs 
of communities into which displaced persons are received, rather than only 
focusing on individuals who cross a border and seek refugee status.

in seeking to rethink the global refugee protection system, we must examine the ways 
in which it has been built upon a foundation of individualism in order to ascertain how we 
can devote more adequate attention to the communities both from which refugees come 
and into which they need to become integrated.

the power of individualism
the values of individualism as developed in the post-enlightenment west are at the base 
of the contemporary refugee protection system. the 1951 geneva refugee convention is 
a further development of article 14 of the 1948 universal declaration of human rights. 
both landmark documents certainly build on earlier traditions, arguably tracing back to 
egyptian, greek, and jewish precedents. but the core of the foundation is the tradition 
of human rights that evolved in the west from the enlightenment to the present. at the 
heart of that tradition is a fierce defense of the rights of the individual over against the 
unlimited imposition of social control through the coercive authority of the broader society 
as expressed through unaccountable leaders.
this focus on individual rights has been enormously powerful, impressively productive 
of a range of social innovations that have come to exert influence around the world, and 

 2016 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 4 number 3 (2016): 76-82remarkably  compelling  even  in  regions  outside  of  the  european  and  american  social 
systems  in  which  it  has  been  generated.  to  offer  only  the  most  cursory  of  overviews, 
individualism as it has developed in the west since the eighteenth century has provided 
leverage against authoritarianism of all sorts. it has also pressed for freedom of expression 
and empowered choice among alternatives at the level of individual selection. it has been 
correlative with the development of market economies and has supported entrepreneurial 
initiatives. finally (in this brief overview), it has served as a foundation for civil society 
and representative government. 
in sum, individualism has been central to the development of core practices of the western 
worldview  that  has  come  to  be  globally  influential,  in  particular  over  the  past  century 
and a half. but powerful, productive, and even compelling as it has been, the tradition of 
individualism has not been without its adverse impacts. this other side of its influence 
is evident especially in its tendency to assign priority to the individual over against the 
community. 
even here, the effects are very complex. one form of community that is characteristic 
of  individualistic  societies  in  general  and  the  united  states  in  particular  is  voluntary 
associations. think of an evangelical protestant church that requires a personal testimony 
that a member has been born again. or consider voluntary membership in such clubs as 
the kiwanis, rotary, or lions, reading or theater groups or other hobby gatherings, hiking 
clubs, professional or vocational associations, and so on. but important as they are, such 
voluntary associations construe communities as the consequence of individual decisions to 
join together to form a larger union.
this assumption of the priority of the individual is evident in the understanding of refugees 
as  individuals  who  have  a  warranted  fear  of  persecution  and  therefore  have  fled  their 
societies to seek safety across a national border. the geneva convention specifically states 
that the rights of the individual refugee are extended to include his or her family. but the 
basic model or pattern is that of an individual who is applying for refugee status after 
fleeing from home. 

the role of community 
this  individualistic  focus  of  refugee  policy  is  the  more  problematical  in  view  of  the 
indisputably communal character of the conflicts that are generating enormous numbers 
of displaced people. to take only a sampling of the places that are producing significant 
numbers of refugees at the moment, syria, afghanistan, somalia, nigeria, and myanmar are 
all indicative of the extent to which displaced people are the result of communal differences 
that lead populations to conclude there is no future in their home country. consequently, 
rethinking the refugee protection system needs to examine how best to address the needs of 
entire communities that are uprooted rather than only to focus on individuals who manage 
to cross a border and seek refugee status. 
the  international  community  and  certainly  the  united  nations  high  commissioner 
for refugees have long recognized that the distinction between refugees and internally 
displaced  persons  is  an  artificial  one  and  is  often  counterproductive.  that  recognition 

77

rethinking the assumptions of refugee policytestifies to the extent to which rethinking refugee protection issues requires a focus on 
issues of community rather than only on individuals and their families. it also underscores 
the ways in which much earlier intervention is crucial.
it is stunning  and dismaying  how refugee crises command attention only once they 
have impinged on the developed world. to take a recent and deeply discouraging instance, 
it is only once bodies began to wash up on the northern shores of the mediterranean and 
photographs started to appear in newspapers and magazines that the crisis of displaced 
syrians registered in the awareness of the west. the fact that a country of some 22 million 
had half of its population displaced and more than four million already refugees across the 
borders of the neighboring countries of lebanon, jordan, turkey, and iraq was not much 
noticed for over four years. 
earlier awareness and intervention are crucial for keeping refugee crises from spiraling 
out  of  control.  how  to  achieve  such  earlier  awareness  and  intervention  is  certainly  an 
enormous challenge for the international community. it will require major investments in 
economic and political development and also in support for displaced populations inside 
countries when communally based conflict is leading to chaos. it will also almost certainly 
entail more adequately trained and funded peacekeeping operations. there is no way to 
rethink refugee policies without also addressing this need for more effective and earlier 
intervention in the countries that are producing substantial numbers of displaced people.
internally displaced people are almost by definition not individuals who are seeking to start 
their lives anew on their own initiative. instead, they are members of communities who 
have been attacked because their ethnic or religious identities differ from those who oppose 
them. resolving such conflicts therefore requires taking into account social differences 
rather than simply individual aspirations. 
refugees from countries with communally based conflicts may fit the individually based 
conception  of  refugees  a  bit  better  than  internally  displaced  persons  do,  but  here  too 
refugee policies cannot ignore the dimension of community affiliations that go beyond 
family bonds. 
as all who work with refugees know, there are three ideal typical routes out of refugee 
status: to return home when it is safe to do so; to be accepted for residence in the country to 
which the refugee has fled; or to be admitted for resettlement to a third country. for the first 
two of those outcomes, community affiliations will almost certainly be dispositive as to the 
viability of the exit plan. it is accordingly imperative that refugee policy take into account 
this dimension of community rather than focus only on the individual family. 
even in the case of the small proportion of refugees accepted for entry into a third country, 
it is crucial that refugee policy recognize the role of communities in facilitating successful 
resettlement. to seek new homes in settings that are not refugee ghettoes but that still do 
include some previously resettled members of the same ethnic or religious or linguistic 
group is an important consideration. so too is the availability of employment that calls for 
skills that the refugee can offer or develop.
my father came to the united states as a penniless immigrant. he was not a refugee but 
rather an economic migrant. with what in retrospect is a remarkable misreading of the world 

78

journal on migration and human securityeconomy, he concluded that employment prospects in his native black forest germany did 
not look promising when he graduated from secondary school, and so he borrowed $100 
and arrived in manhattan at the age of 20  in 1930 just as the depression was getting 
deeper and deeper. in a sense he fits the individualistic model of the refugee who seeks 
a better future. he did come alone. he began by sweeping floors in a grocery store. but 
he  very  quickly  developed  a  network  of  fellow  immigrants  (which  after  six  years  also 
included the woman who would become my mother). through this network, immigrants 
over the years provided each other friendship and support. as they married, it also came 
to include their families. this extended network gathered very frequently in the ymca on 
23rd street in manhattan and has now celebrated reunions for more than eight decades and 
over three generations. 
i allow myself the self-indulgence of mentioning my father and our family because his 
immigration illustrates that even those who exemplify the individualism of moving out 
on their own cannot succeed without the bonds of community that sustain them and afford 
ways to move forward. as we rethink refugee policies, we need to keep that lesson in mind. 
as much as we celebrate personal initiative and the power of individualism, we also must 
recognize its significant limitations, including its failure to recognize fully the dependence 
of all individuals on the communities that have nurtured them and that will sustain them in 
the future.

a further look at western individualism
the limitations of individualism as it is represented in modern western free-market ideology 
and mass culture are evident even when current patterns are evaluated in terms of their own 
historical antecedents. central to this patrimony are the powerfully influential figures of 
john locke and adam smith in britain and immanuel kant on the continent. yet none of 
these thinkers provides support for the kind of uncritical individualism that characterizes 
the rhetoric of so many of those who presently invoke their names.
as a matter of historical fact  notably in his letters on toleration (1690, 1693) and 
in the second of his two treatises of civil government (1690)  locke certainly gave 
considerable  impetus  to  the  traditions  that  have  come  to  characterize  the  political  and 
economic  orientation  of  western  liberal  democracy.  in  particular,  his  second  treatise 
delineates his view of humanity in the state of nature. arguing against the position of thomas 
hobbes that humans originate in a state of hostility and antagonism, locke envisions equal 
and independent individuals who enjoy a natural happiness. yet even though he is far more 
positive about human nature than is hobbes, locke too moves quickly to the formation of 
the state as a means of protection against the excesses of individualism. thus the social 
contract is required to guard against any who might attempt to live outside the law of 
nature.
like locke, kant is appropriately counted among those who have shaped modern western 
individualism.  his  central  concern  to  preserve  human  freedom  and  moral  autonomy 
while also acknowledging the power of scientific understanding places him squarely in 
this tradition. indeed, his preoccupation with establishing a solid foundation for personal 
moral agency and responsibility in the impersonal world of modern science is emblematic 

79

rethinking the assumptions of refugee policyfor western individualism, even among those who have scarcely heard of him and who 
certainly are not aware of the intellectual revolution that his thought constitutes.
yet, like locke, kant is far from advocating an uncritical individualism. knowledge, for 
kant preeminently exemplified in newtonian physics, can never be a matter of individual 
idiosyncrasy but rather must be universal and necessary. similarly, moral action  reason 
in its practical employment, to put it in terms of his conceptual apparatus  presupposes 
a shared context of meaning and common criteria for adjudicating alternatives. (in kants 
technical terminology, the postulates of practical reason constitute the shared context of 
meaning and the categorical imperative in its various formulations specifies the criterion 
for determining which actions are moral). this embedding of attention to human freedom 
and moral autonomy in more inclusive contexts is integral to the analyses of the critique of 
pure reason (1781) and the critique of practical reason (1788). but it becomes ever more 
central in kants later writings: the critique of judgment (1790), religion within the limits 
of reason alone (1793), and in such pieces as the extended essay perpetual peace (1795).
like  locke  and  kant,  adam  smith  is  appropriately  enlisted  in  the  cause  of  western 
individualism.  his  thought  also  represents  the  close  historical  connection  between  this 
tradition of individualism and modern western laissez-faire economic theory. yet what 
smith actually wrote lends little support to the more recent arguments for unconstrained 
markets and unrestrained individualism on behalf of which his name is so often invoked.
in his an inquiry into the nature and causes of the wealth of nations (1776), smith certainly 
contends that the individual pursuit of self-interest can contribute to the public good and 
general welfare. but he also recognizes that the ambitions of individuals and private groups 
might be opposed to the public interest and in such cases would require restrictions imposed 
by the state. more fundamentally, smith, who was a professor of moral philosophy, affirms 
the pursuit of individual interests only in the context of a network of social relations, as is 
clearly articulated in his theory of moral sentiments (1759).  

religion and individualism
in  affirming  the  role  of  the  community  in  constraining  the  excesses  of  individual  self-
assertion, locke, kant, and smith all in effect stand with the vast preponderance of human 
wisdom  and  experience  over  against  only  the  modern west  that  so  often  invokes  their 
names.
perhaps the most radical insight into the inadequacy of idealization of the individual is the 
position of buddhist traditions that there is no self. this teaching of anatt or antman is 
shared across a remarkable range of buddhist communities, from theravda traditions in 
south and southeast asia, to their mahyna counterparts in east asia, and to all of their 
offspring in the west. to construe the self as an individual entity is to fail to apprehend 
the codependence of all of reality. it is to be captive to an illusion and therefore to live in 
delusion.
other religious traditions express this same position in various ways. traditions as disparate 
as confucianism on the one hand and judaism and islam on the other deem individuals 
to be constituted through their social relationships. in short, for confucians, jews, and 

80

journal on migration and human securitymuslims, the community has logical, temporal, and normative priority over the individual.
even those religious conceptions that seem to glorify the individual in the end subordinate 
the self to a more encompassing normative structure or reality. i offer two examples. the 
hindu affirmation that atman is brahman  that the self is identical with the ultimate  
does celebrate the dignity of the human person. but for hindus this equation precisely 
does not exalt the discrete individual as separate from the whole of which it is an integral 
part. a second example is the greek and then christian idea of the soul. this conception 
confers enduring worth on the individual and, unlike the hindu affirmation of atman, it 
does not dissolve this individual into the ultimate. yet even when the soul is construed as 
an enduring individual entity, its end is to love, to enjoy, and to worship the divine reality 
for which it is destined.
in sum, as with influential enlightenment thinkers like locke, kant, and smith, so too for 
the major world religions, individuals cannot be deemed independent of the communities 
that nourish and support them  and that also can pose dire threats to their survival. 

the challenge of inclusive communities
rethinking refugee policy must take into account these lessons from centuries of religious 
traditions  and  also  from  more  recent  secular  western  thinking,  the  more  so  because 
recent experience offers overwhelming evidence that focusing exclusively on persecuted 
individuals  who  cross  borders  to  seek  relief  is  an  inadequate  approach  to  ongoing 
crises. the goal of the rethinking underway must be to preserve the indispensable core 
of respect for individuals and their courageous actions while also affirming the crucial 
role of communities (including but not limited to families). further, this integration of 
individualistic roots with crucial community considerations must be embraced not only in 
dealing with the consequences of communally based discrimination and conflict but also in 
identifying and seeking to address its causes. 
while it is widely acknowledged that there must be earlier attention and more effective 
intervention through development assistance and more adequately trained and supported 
peacekeeping operations, there is very little action based on this recognition. in the best of 
worlds, everyone would agree on the need for large-scale efforts to prevent the conflicts 
that create the largest numbers of displaced people. unless and until there is much more 
such action, the refugee crises worldwide will continue to be massively challenging.
it is urgent to launch concerted programs to address conflict prevention through development 
and peacekeeping operations. but the rethinking of refugee policies cannot and should not 
be deferred because such larger questions of international policy also require attention. 
i will therefore conclude this essay with a summary of the steps that need to be taken in 
rethinking refugee policies, and i will thereby state explicitly the imperatives that i have 
already suggested or implied in my less prescriptive observations. 
the first step that can and should be taken is to declare as a matter of policy that the distinction 
between internally displaced persons and refugees is not only unhelpful but fundamentally 
misleading. crossing even an arbitrarily drawn border is certainly a significant move that 
will require adjustments in how the situation is addressed and how civil authorities are 

81

rethinking the assumptions of refugee policyengaged. but such adaptations of responses should not change the status of the uprooted 
persons who should be the focus of attention. 
a second step is to acknowledge that not only individuals and their families but also entire 
communities  must  become  the  focus  of  attention  in  refugee  policy  deliberations.  this 
requirement obtains for understanding the needs both in sending countries and in receiving 
countries:  protection  must  be  afforded  when  tensions  rise  in  home  countries,  which 
requires earlier and more substantial investments in conflict prevention and development; 
and acceptance and support must also be provided in the places of resettlement. while 
the former may be beyond the current purview of those directly responsible for refugee 
protection and resettlement, the latter is emphatically at the heart of the enterprise.
a third step is to build on this attention to communities as well as individuals and therefore 
to invest concerted thought and effort in considering how best to incorporate displaced 
persons into larger communities even if those communities represent differences in ethnic, 
religious, and other features of identity. here again, the goal of inclusive communities is 
extremely relevant to sending as well as receiving countries, though those responsible 
for refugee protection and resettlement usually do not have direct responsibility in sending 
countries. but in the case of receiving countries, the requirement needs to be at the core 
of the enterprise. 
too often resettled refugees remain segregated in their own ghettoes. for initial support, 
living and working in communities that include other recently resettled refugees, especially 
ones from the same area, may be quite salutary. but the long-term aim must be for refugees 
to become integrated into the larger society  not to denigrate or break with their land of 
birth but to be fully accepted and affirmed as a member of their new nation. 
this third step embodies what i take to be the core values that should inform rethinking 
the global refugee protection system. all of us  whether recent refugees or not  need 
to aspire to belong to communities that are inclusive in the sense that members affirm quite 
particular convictions without requiring that every member share the same convictions. 
such communities may be utopian in the sense that sir thomas more intended when he 
invented the term, namely they are literally (in greek) no place. but for the sake of the 
world we share, newly arrived refugees and longer-term residents alike, we had better work 
toward this admittedly only very partially achieved ideal. may rethinking refugee policy be 
a series of steps in that direction!

 

 

 

82

journal on migration and human security