at the edge of us immigrations 
halt of folly: data, information, 
and research needs in the event 
of legalization

fernando riosmena
university of colorado boulder

 executive summary
virtually  all  accounts  of  the  state  of  the  us  immigration  system  point 
to its patently broken condition, with the presence of almost 12 million 
people without legal status paramount to this characterization. because 
of several recent developments including continued and renewed interest 
in regularizing the status of most unauthorized migrants in executive and 
legislative branch agendas, the center for migration studies of new york, 
with support from the john d. and catherine t. macarthur foundation, 
convened  a  group  of  immigration  specialists,  researchers,  scholars,  and 
advocates in washington, dc in september 2013 to discuss potential data, 
information, and research needs in the event of the enactment of large-
scale legalization programs for the unauthorized population. 
this paper describes the results of this one-and-a-half day discussion. it 
begins with a description of the contours of a legalization program if it 
were  to  follow  a  similar  form  as  s.  744,  the  border  security,  economic 
opportunity, and immigration modernization act passed by the senate in 
june 2013. in addition to being the most recent effort in this area, s. 744 
includes a relatively complex set of conditions for earning legalization. 
a number of data, information, and research needs would need to be met 
to ensure the proper implementation of such a program. first, planning 
for effective local outreach and service delivery efforts requires estimating 
the eligible population at finer-scale geographies; understanding financial 
and  time  disincentives  to  apply  and  adhere  to  the  program  and  skill 
levels required; assessing capacity in service delivery relative to the size 
and service needs of the local eligible population; tracking the progress of 
applicants through the legalization process; and understanding effective 
forms  of  outreach  and  service  delivery.  second,  assessing  the  effects  of 
legalization on immigrant integration, future immigration, and fiscal and 

 2013 by the center for migration studies of new york. all rights reserved.jmhs volume 1 number 4 (2013): 148-162economic life in the united states would include anticipating the effects of 
legalization on eligibility and use of locally- and state-provided services by 
the legalized and their families.
within  the  discussion  of  these  issues,  the  paper  describes  recent  and 
potential  efforts  to  develop  methodologies,  partnerships,  and  evaluation 
and tracking systems by different stakeholders and organizations to ensure 
and assess the short- and long-term effectiveness of legalization efforts. in 
doing this, it alludes to the lessons of past regularization programs addressed 
during the meeting including the immigration reform and control act of 
1986 and the deferred action for childhood arrivals program.
although the volatile political climate may make a full-fledged legalization 
program unlikely in the near future, waiting to plan for such a possibility 
until after legislation passes would be ill-advised. because such a discussion 
may also help shape the parameters of how legalization takes place, fora 
like that provided by this meeting are valuable vehicles to organize and 
mobilize knowledge, and should be thus continued and expanded.

introduction 
every other contemporary scholarly and almost all advocacy accounts related to the us 
immigration regime begin by declaring the systems patently broken status. the clearest sign 
of this malaisethe root causes of which are nonetheless posited to be related to somewhat 
different forces across these accountsis represented by the presence of close to 12 million 
individuals without legal authorization to reside and work in the country (passel, cohn and 
gonzalez-barrera 2013; warren and warren 2013). as such, any discussion of legislative 
reform (or, to a lesser extent, executive action) to amend a relatively ineffective set of rules, 
regulations, and practices often begins by addressing the status of this population. 
many argue that it is highly unrealistic to deport (or, in administrative parlance, remove) 
that many people. even though just over 3 million people were formally removed between 
fy2001  and  fy2011  (dhs  2012,  table  39)  putting  a  real  dent  in  the  unauthorized 
population exclusively through enforcement appears unlikely given the large number of 
people continuing to enter without or falling out of status, resulting in the relative stability 
of the unauthorized population even in the midst of massive deportation (hoefer, rytina 
and baker 2012; passel et al. 2013; warren and passel 1987; warren and warren 2013). 
studies evaluating the effectiveness of immigration enforcement net of other conditions 
(e.g., economic trends on both sides of the border or in specific immigrant destinations, the 
evolution of migrant networks) also suggest enforcement-only approaches are not a viable 
solution (angelucci 2012; massey and riosmena 2010; parrado 2012). with the financial, 
social, emotional, and political costs of continuing, protracted, massive levels of removals 
looming  large  (amuedo-dorantes,  puttitanun  and  martinez-donate  2013;  dreby  2010; 
golash-boza  2012),  regularization  seems  like  a  practical  and,  for  many  experts,  a  fair 
option (hanson 2007; massey, durand and malone 2002), and one that has been favored 
by a majority of americans in recent times (muste 2013).

149

legalization data, information and research needs although  the  regularization  of  (most  of)  the  unauthorized  population  has  been  on  the 
immigration reform agenda for several years (for some past earned legalization efforts, 
see rosenblum, capps and yi-ying lin 2011), recent progress has reignited the idea of 
passing so-called comprehensive immigration reform (cir). most notably, on june 27, 
2013 the senate passed s. 744, the border security, economic opportunity, and immigration 
modernization act.1 in addition to proposing broad changes to the immigration system 
aimed at adding flexibility to better accommodate and manage labor-related migration in 
particular, s. 744 included the establishment of a long, winding road to permanent residency 
for most people who are currently unauthorized under a registered provisional immigrant 
status (rpi). in addition to supporting the general ideas behind s. 744 and its legalization 
efforts in particular, the obama administration had taken prior action through the deferred 
action for childhood arrivals (daca) program with the purpose of providing temporary 
reprieve  from  the  risk  of  deportation  to  eligible  undocumented  youth  brought  into  the 
united states by their parents.
given  these  considerations  and  developments,  on  september  1920,  2013  the  center 
for migration studies (cms) convened a group of immigration specialists, researchers, 
scholars,  and  advocates  in  washington,  dc  to  discuss  potential  data,  information,  and 
research needs in the event of the enactment of large-scale legalization programs for the 
unauthorized population. this paper reports on the main results of this one-and-a-half day 
gathering, which was supported by a grant from the john d. and catherine t. macarthur 
foundation. as participants were assured their comments would not be for attribution, no 
credit is hereby given to any one individual in particular. the paper instead collates and 
describes collective deliberations during the meeting, as agreed to by meeting participants. 
many may think it unlikely that a version of s. 744, or any other major legalization program, 
would pass both the house and senate and become law in the near future.2 yet, even for 
low-odds propositions, planning and readiness are of paramount importance for ensuring 
and evaluating success in the event it does take place. because the implementation period of 
past regularization programs has been rather short, assessing the types of information, data, 
and research different stakeholders may need to ensure and evaluate the smooth running 
of such a program cannot wait until a possible bill becomes law. further, understanding 
potential information, data, and research needs related to an eventual legalization program 
could not only aid in its implementation but shape the conversation. early information 
about prior immigration reform efforts has also helped correct some problems existing in 
various past bills.3 
to  contextualize  the  discussion  of  these  information,  data,  and  research  needs,  i  first 
present  a  summary  of  the  general  provisions  of  a  legalization  program  along  the  lines 
of what was proposed under s. 744. i draw some comparisons between s. 744 and the 
legalization programs of the immigration reform and control act (irca) of 1986, which 

1  border security, economic opportunity, and immigration modernization act of 2013, s. 744, 113th cong., 
1st sess. (2013). http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/bills-113s744es/pdf/bills-113s744es.pdf. 
2  indeed, as of this writing no bill had become law and it appeared unlikely that the house would pass an 
omnibus immigration bill in the near future.
3  for instance, calculations of populations falling out of eligibility for asylum given changes in regulations 
by the illegal immigration and immigrant responsibility act of 1996 led to the enactment of the nicaraguan 
adjustment and central american relief act of 1997 (coffino 2006).

150

journal on migration and human securitywere both used as the basis of discussion during the meeting. s. 744 is a model of what a 
contemporary legalization program may look like, while irca offers still useful lessons 
on successes and failures in outreach, enrollment, and on the consequences of the program 
for applicants and others.4 i then follow with a description of the main information, data, 
or research needs identified by the meeting participants that would allow local and state 
governments  and  immigration-related,  service  delivery  agencies  to  better  plan  for  an 
effective  program  of  outreach  and  application  support.  preparation  would  include  the 
sharing of best practices; research to allow local, state, and federal agencies to anticipate 
eligibility and service demand from legalized populations; and establishment of a basis to 
assess the effectiveness of legalization program(s) on immigrant incorporation and future 
unauthorized and authorized migration dynamics.

the contours of a multi-pronged legalization program
legalization programs can be general or population-specific. s. 744, like irca, included 
both types (for a history and breakdown of general and population-specific programs in the 
united states over the last three decades, see kerwin 2010). s. 744 considered two special 
populations: childhood arrivals (the so-called dreamers) and agricultural workers (whose 
legalization provisions under s. 744 were known as the blue card program).
in  addition  to  population  or  group  membership,  both  general  and  special-population 
programs may include several types of eligibility requirements, though special-population 
programs generally have lower bars and requirements than general programs. in the case of 
s. 744, applicants need to meet at least five criteria to be able to apply for two rpi terms of 
around six years each before being able to graduate to lawful permanent residence (lpr):5
arrival cutoff dates. legalization programs, including those in irca as well as others 
(e.g.,  the  nicaraguan adjustment  and  central american  relief act  (nacara)  of 
1997) generally include cutoff dates to minimize the possibility of a spike in additional 
unauthorized migration between signing and implementation. in the case of s. 744, 
this cutoff date was set to december 31, 2011 for everyone except dependents of an 
(eligible)  unauthorized  migrant  adult,  who  must  have  arrived  in  the  united  states 
before december 31, 2012. 
continuous presence. to be eligible for legalization, unauthorized immigrants also 
need  to  prove  they  remained  (mostly)  present  in  the  country  since  the  cutoff  date 
above. continuous presence has not been required under special agricultural worker 
programs in either irca or s. 744 because many agricultural workers may spend the 
off-season in the sending country, though they are required to complete minimum time 
4  a somewhat more detailed summary and analysis of the specifics of legalization pathways opened by s. 
744 is provided in icirr (2013). for an analysis of other less complex recent (failed) legislative attempts at 
passing earned legalization, see rosenblum et al. (2011).
5  in addition to individual requirements for each applicant, s. 744 includes triggers, requirements that the 
federal government needs to meet before anyone is allowed to become an lpr including: the deployment 
of a border security strategy that is operational; the completion of a border fence strategy (including 
700 miles of pedestrian fencing); the deployment of more than 40,000 border patrol agents on the mexico-
us border; the full implementation of the e-verify (electronic employment verification program); and the 
implementation of an electronic exit system to better detect and deter visa overstays.

151

legalization data, information and research needs in agricultural work (90 days in the case of irca; 100 days or 575 hours in the case 
of s. 744). of note in s. 744 is that some individuals who had been removed from the 
country would be allowed to obtain rpi status. in particular, people with direct family 
ties to lprs and citizens (e.g., who would otherwise be eligible to apply for lpr under 
family reunification provisions of the immigration and nationality act (ina)) would 
be  allowed  to  apply  and  thus  waive  bars  related  to  their  prior  unauthorized  status 
triggered by their departure or removal. in addition, individuals who were removed 
from  the  country  after  the  cutoff  date  and  would  have  otherwise  been  eligible  for 
rpi status through the special program aimed at regularizing childhood arrivalsalso 
referred to as the dream actwould be eligible for rpi status.
language and civics requirements. like irca, s. 744 would require that applicants 
pass english and civics tests prior to becoming lprs. these tests would be similar to 
those required for naturalization (massey et al. 2002; rosenblum et al. 2011). 
socioeconomic requirements. s. 744 includes stringent criteria to convert rpi into 
lpr status. this includes a relatively hefty fine ($1,000 in addition to undetermined 
application fees) as well as the payment of any pending assessed taxes. further, recent 
legalization bills including s. 744 also contain other socioeconomic requirements prior 
to rpi renewal and becoming an lpr. these include proving continuous regular 
employment, full-time school enrollment, or having a family income of at least 100 
percent and 125 percent of the federal poverty line (for rpi renewal and progression 
to lpr, respectively), with exceptions for age, disability, caregivers, dependents, and 
extreme hardship.
good moral character. applicants would need to pass background checks throughout 
the process of becoming rpis as well as when applying for lpr status. commission 
of a felony, aggravated felony, or three misdemeanor convictions, as well as unlawful 
voting, would disqualify applicants. however, if a conviction had been expunged or 
set aside, it would not count against an applicant. other types of offenses that would 
not  count  against  applicants  include  minor  traffic  offenses,  state  or  local  offenses 
related to peoples immigration status, or violation of the rules that could otherwise bar 
someone from getting status (e.g., immigration document fraud).6 the bars involving 
more serious criminal behavior and national security threats or terrorism could not be 
waived. 

main data, information, and research needs to plan for 
and evaluate a legalization program
to  ensure  appropriate  levels  of  outreach,  service  delivery,  and  knowledge  about  the 
(eligible and ineligible) unauthorized population prior, during, and after legalization takes 
placeincluding understanding of the effects of the program on those regularizing and 
on othersseveral stakeholders said they would greatly benefit from different types of 
information, data, and research. during the meeting, two major objectives of planning for 
effective outreach and service delivery, and broadly assessing the effects of a legalization 

6  even if one of those rules applied to a potentially eligible migrant, the applicant could apply for a waiver 
in most cases.

152

journal on migration and human securityprogram were identified, along with more specific information, data and research needs 
within each objective. 

1. to plan for effective local outreach and service delivery efforts

1.1  estimating  the  likely  eligible  population  at  finer-scale 

geographies

in order to estimate levels of demand for us citizenship and immigration services (uscis) 
workload and the outreach and legal assistance that potential applicants may need from 
nongovernmental organizations (ngos) interested in ensuring the success of the program, 
it is first necessary to estimate the eligible population. these estimates should be available 
at relatively fine geographic scales, for example, at the state level and, when possible, local 
level. there are some estimates of the unauthorized population available for select states 
(hoefer et al. 2012; passel et al. 2013) and for all states (see online appendices in warren 
and warren 2013). 
ideally,  these  estimates  would  need  to  be  further  spatially  downscaled  and  augmented 
or  overlaid  by  adding  estimates  of  unauthorized  migrants  meeting  each  and  all  of  the 
requirements  for  rpi  (e.g.,  language  requirements).  for  some  estimates  of  this  sort 
with  prior,  less  restrictive  regularization  initiatives,  see  passel  and  lopez  (2012)  and 
rosenblum et al. (2011). these estimates could also benefit from calculations on whether 
eligible individuals may also be eligible to legalize under provisions already established 
by the ina (e.g., family reunification) provided that, as in the case of s. 744, the bill also 
includes  provisions  waiving  any  ban  triggered  by  unauthorized  presence  in  the  united 
states.  understanding  who  would  be  eligible  through  other  provisions  is  vital  because 
these individuals may be able to become lprs more rapidly and for a lower fee, and s. 744 
forces applicants for rpi to forego other vehicles to legal status.
recent efforts by demographers discussed in the meeting may allow for further downscaling 
estimates of the unauthorized population (e.g., for some major cities) likely eligible for 
regularization. in addition to the use of localized surveys with legal status information 
(e.g., marcelli, forthcoming), demographers have also refined methodologies to impute 
the legal status of foreign-born populations using legal status information from other (e.g., 
smaller, one-time) surveys (burtless and singer 2011; capps et al. 2013; van hook et al., 
forthcoming). participants discussed creating identifiers of legal status and a new variable 
based on the detailed data collected each year in the census bureaus american community 
survey (acs).7 this would allow the public at large to do customized searches of acs 
datasets for the characteristics of legal and unauthorized immigrants. the availability of 
these data in the future, or the use of similar imputation techniques on local and regional 
surveys (e.g., the los angeles family and neighborhood survey) that provide substantial 
detail  on  other  aspects  of  eligibility  such  as  language  and  admissibility,  could  greatly 

7  because many populations and particularly the unauthorized are generally undercounted in censuses and 
surveys (e.g., van hook et al., forthcoming), demographers generally adjust these estimates up (passel et 
al. 2013; warren and warren 2013). improved techniques could include a set of weights to perform these 
adjustments as well.

153

legalization data, information and research needs advance the assessment of local demand for the program and for services associated with 
it.

1.2 understanding incentives and levels of skill to apply and 

adhere to the program

in addition to assessing eligibility per se, meeting participants also pointed out the need 
to understand potential barriers to application and adherence to the program among those 
eligible. this includes knowledge of the share of eligible participants who might find fees 
prohibitive or face other barriers like proving the time of arrival, continuous presence, 
continuous employment and lack of english language proficiency. an assessment of these 
price and time elasticities could illuminate the circumstances under which individuals may 
be unlikely to apply or to remain in the program and could potentially help in designing 
ways  in  which  selection  and  attrition  could  be  reduced.  for  instance,  this  information 
could help congress or the executive branch design or adjust the fee structure for the low-
income or rules related to continuous employment for the self-employed.8
assessing  the  language  and  technological  skills  of  the  eligible  population  could  also 
help plan for the best and most efficient way to provide services for different segments. 
information on language skill and technological literacy and access could guide outreach 
and application preparation strategies. likewise, it was of interest to participants whether 
some  applicants  could,  with  minimal  support,  prepare  and  file  their  own  applications, 
allowing service-providers to devote more time to other categories of applicants. such a 
strategy would help to maximize the resources available in each community.

1.3 assessing local capacity in service delivery 

according  to  meeting  participants,  prior  experience  with  massive  legalization  in  the 
context of ircawhen almost 2.7 million people legalized (kerwin 2010)placed a 
very large burden on the capacity of many service providers and federal, state and local 
government agencies. daca brought similar pressures, although the information collected 
for this program could be used to pre-qualify applicants for legalization under s. 744 
and satisfy certain requirements of the dream act, if this legislation passed. despite 
immense  technological  advancement  since  irca,  a  legalization  bill  would  still  create 
enormous  challenges  to  local  service  capacity,  particularly  for  organizations  providing 
free or heavily subsidized services. the unauthorized population is more than three times 
as large as it was in the late 1980s (passel et al. 2013; warren and warren 2013) and 
at least five times larger than eligible daca participants. furthermore, it is much more 
spread out geographically relative to pre-irca times (e.g., durand, massey and capoferro 
2005;  singer  2004;  suro  and  singer  2002),  including  nontrivial  numbers  of  migrants 
living in nonmetropolitan areas (donato et al. 2007). thus, while many less traditional 
immigrant gateways have large (unauthorized) migrant populations, they may not yet have 

8  congress may potentially take into consideration how much and when migrants may be able to pay in 
fees when determining the fee structure of the program, among other factors entering this consideration. 
for instance, whether paying a $2,000 fine before becoming lpr would increase the percentage of people 
adhering to the program relative to paying $1,000 during each rpi phase. 

154

journal on migration and human securitydeveloped their organizational capacity to accommodate these new populations, much less 
to respond to a legalization program.9 it is in the context of these likely underserved areas 
that assessing local capacity around outreach, application assistance, full legal assistance, 
as well as english language and civic classes, among other activities, becomes particularly 
pressing. 
meeting participants emphasized the need to match different levels of need for general 
guidance versus more individual legal assistance, with an estimate of the local capacity 
provided by different kinds of non-profit and government organizations. in particular, it 
was proposed that information on local capacity should be collected, shared, and mapped 
according  to  the  types  and  levels  of  service  provided  by  different  organizations.  this 
information should be compared to information on applicants that: could apply on their 
own with minimal guidance; could apply with information provided in a classroom setting; 
and would need one-to-one counseling. 
organizations  range  in  their  capability  and  capacity  to  provide  community  outreach, 
application assistance, and complex legal work. organizations with only basic screening 
capacity could be of assistance by helping channel more complex cases to private attorneys 
or to federally-recognized charitable organizations with attorneys or with accredited non-
attorneys who can provide legal assistance. 
during the meeting, it was also stressed that nontraditional partners may be particularly 
important to assist specific populations, such as providing outreach and group processing 
workshops in places, within industries, or to national origin groups with small numbers 
of  unauthorized  immigrants,  otherwise  hard-to-reach  groups  or  those  that  might  have 
been underrepresented in prior regularization efforts. for example, some asian-american 
populations were underrepresented in the case of irca and daca.10 
it was suggested that organizations not mainly or typically associated with immigration-
related assistance, but with a broad interest in the success of a legalization program, could 
also be partners in these efforts. participants suggested that nontraditional partners could 
help  with  hard-to-reach  populations,  provide  basic  eligibility  screening,  and  operate  as 
clearinghouses  to  channel  potential  applicants  to  other  organizations  according  to  the 
complexity of their case, capacity to self-file and economic means. because new gateway 
communities may have large eligible populations but less local capacity, nontraditional 
partners may be of particular relevance in these places. 
the discussion also highlighted that other, private forms of local capacity, including the 
capacity of so-called notarios, should be catalogued and mapped for two reasons. first, 
a large notario presence in the context of low levels of other local capacity could imply 
higher  levels  of  migrant  vulnerability  and  would  underscore  the  need  for  redoubling 
efforts in specific locales. second, despite the general sense that many notarios can be ill-
informed and sometimes ill-intentioned, it may nonetheless be possible that some notarios 
could  become  partners  and  points  of  contact  and  screening,  particularly  in  places  with 

9  for a recent news story related to these issues, see   http://www.npr.org/blogs/codeswitch/2013/12/10/ 
249766634/in-a-small-missouri-town-immigrants-turn-to-schools-for-help. 
10  see, for instance, http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/09/nyregion/advocates-struggle-to-reach-immigrants-
eligible-for-deferred-action.html?_r=0. 

155

legalization data, information and research needs fewer options and lower capacity. yet participants emphasized that vetting mechanisms 
for  these  and  other  kinds  of  providers  need  to  be  in  place,  perhaps  aided  by  national 
legal and immigration aid organizations (e.g., legal training from organizations like the 
catholic legal immigration network, inc. (clinic) or immigrant legal resource center 
(ilrc)), which may include formal board of immigration appeals (bia) recognition and 
accreditation, to ensure a sufficient level of knowledge and service capacity. 
while  some  partners  would  be  helpful  in  determining  program  eligibility,  others  could 
provide assistance in meeting particular program requirements, including language and 
civics requirements. school systems, city and county agencies, utility companies and banks 
could provide the documentation needed to establish entry dates and continuous residence. 
because the mix of organizations that may be able to provide these services will likely 
vary across different locations, it will be important to create databases and maps of these 
organizations in each community. 
finally, public-private venturesparticularly with technology companieswere discussed 
as a potential way to integrate some of these efforts in collecting, organizing, sharing, and 
using data. some of these companies, most notably facebook, have lobbied and otherwise 
generally supported the idea of immigration reform and could help to reach and provide 
assistance  to  tech-savvier  populations  (e.g.,  dreamers).  it  was  reported  that  other 
technology companies have also provided resources such as tablets to outreach workers 
as part of their community outreach and social marketing efforts, thus suggesting that they 
may be willing collaborate in supporting some of these activities.

1.4  tracking  applicants  progress  through  the  legalization 

process 
in addition to anticipating potential problems of who may apply (or drop out of) the program, 
it is in the interest of uscis, service providers, immigration analysts and scholars to track the 
progress of applicants throughout the different stages of regularization. timely information 
of this sort would allow different organizations to assess whether additional outreach or 
aid activities may be necessary to ensure robust participation, understand which program 
requirements may have been particularly onerous, rendering many applicants unable or 
ineligible to continue such as high fees, failing background checks or english tests, and to 
identify how life circumstances change in ways that motivate certain applicants to drop out 
of the program. 

1.5 understanding and sharing effective forms of outreach and 

service delivery
participants stressed the need to understand the effectiveness of different forms of outreach 
and service delivery to establish a platform to share best practices in these areas. to evaluate 
outreach and service delivery, one might compare predicted to actual demand of particular 
segments of the unauthorized population. however, the specifics of how to go about doing 
this are not straightforward. logically, understanding past performance in regularization 
effortssuch as irca, nacara, and dacawas viewed as the first step to identify 

156

journal on migration and human securitypopulations and locations in which program performance was not as high as desirable. 
participants also discussed the idea of curating and disseminating best practices in areas such 
as screening and interviewing techniques; the collection of information that would allow 
organizations to channel and triage cases; ways to assess the need for more information 
about  applicants;  ways  in  which  localities  can  provide  documents  to  support  program 
applications; how to reach communities not coming forward or doing so slowly; and ways 
to involve nontraditional players and to expand the number of local service providers. in 
addition to using pre-established networks of providers, public-private partnerships could 
be of use in coming up with innovative information-sharing schemes.

2. to assess the effects of legalization on immigrant integration, 
future immigration, and the fiscal and economic life in the united states. 

2.1  understanding  the  effects  of  legalization  on  immigrant 

incorporation and assimilation

as with any other policy intervention, legalization is expected to have direct and intended 
consequences  as  well  as  indirect,  unintended,  or  unforeseen  ones. the  program  should 
improve the lives of immigrants in the short-run and help facilitate their integration and 
that of their descendants in the long-run. regularization of status should foster political 
participation and improve the wellbeing of immigrants and their families in dimensions 
such as mental health, access to health care, and working conditions and wages.11 
the collection of information from successful irca applicants from both administrative 
sources as well as surveysmost notably through a short-panel longitudinal project known 
as the legalized population survey (lps)12spurred a large amount of research on labor 
market behavior, social service use, and family immigration dynamics during the first few 
years after legalization (amuedo-dorantes and bansak 2011; bean, edmonston and passel 
1990;  borjas  and  tienda  1993;  chiswick  and  miller  1999;  kossoudji  and  cobb-clark 
2000; powers, seltzer and shi 1998; tienda and singer 1995; woodrow-lafield 1994).13
participants  suggested  that  these  data  collection  efforts  are  key  to  understanding  the 
integration  of  the  legalized  and  their  families  into  us  society,  and  suggested  a  few 
improvements in data collection relative to lps-1 and lps-2, collected in 1989 and 1992, 
respectively. among these suggestions were the inclusion of more information on other 
aspects of immigrant life, and an expansion of the follow-up period from five to at least ten 
years. the experience of the more recent new immigrant survey-pilot and new immigrant 
survey (jasso et al. 2004) could be used as a model to improve data collection in terms of 
topics and follow-up procedures.
11  for research on the burden of irregular immigration status on different dimensions of wellbeing, see 
derose et al. (2009); hall et al. (2010); and menjvar (2006).
12  for a brief summary, see powers et al. (2004). for a description of the survey methodology, see http://
mmp.opr.princeton.edu/lps/lpspage.htm or http://idsc.iza.org/?page=27&id=53.
13  research aimed to understand the effects of irca (including legalization) on the lives of the legalized 
also used other sources of survey data, such as the mexican migration project (e.g., donato and massey 
1993; phillips and massey 1999).

157

legalization data, information and research needs 2.2 understanding the effects of legalization and other changes in 

the immigration system on future legal and unauthorized flows
beyond the more direct consequences of legalization on successful applicants and their 
families,  regularization  programs  may  have  effects  on  populations  other  than  those 
legalizing. most notably, particular attention has been paid to the impact of past legalization 
programs and, thus, how legalization might affect unauthorized immigrant flows. in addition 
to the likelihood that the legalized would eventually sponsor a number of relatives for 
admission (woodrow-lafield 1994), immigration analysts, policymakers, and the public 
have been particularly interested in the effect of legalization and comprehensive reform 
more broadly on additional illegal (as well as legal) migration. although it is clear that 
irca as a whole did not deter unauthorized migration in the long-run, it did not appear to 
have encouraged illegal immigration in the short-run either (donato, durand and massey 
1992; orrenius and zavodny 2003). with more administrative data on legal migration and 
enforcement, as well as survey data on unauthorized flows, it will be possible to estimate 
the effect of a legalization program and other possible legislative changes on future legal 
and undocumented flows.

2.3 anticipating the effects of legalization on eligibility and use of 
locally- and state-provided services by legalized and related populations
legalization  is  naturally  accompanied  by  increasing  rights  and  privileges  for  program 
participants. these include some forms of public assistance and services, many of which 
are  provided  by  local  and  state  governments. as  a  result,  legalization  may  lead  to  an 
increase in the benefit-eligible population, or may otherwise elicit increased utilization of 
benefits and government services. furthermore, while service levels and eligibility vary 
from state to state, many public benefit programs remain federally-mandated at least at a 
minimum level. because many of these programs work under federal grant mechanisms 
requiring states and localities to match funds or include so-called maintenance-of-effort 
(moe) provisions, service expansion of any sort will likely cost states and/or localities 
additional amounts (cbo 2013). 
meeting participants stressed the need to understand the government services for which 
the  legalized  population  would  qualify  (by  state)  and  the  associated  increases  in  use. 
furthermore, the experience with the implementation of ircas state legalization impact 
grants  program  (sliag)established  to  help  states  defray  some  of  these  additional 
obligationssuggests  many  areas  of  improvement,  particularly  on  the  reimbursement 
model. for a description of some of these challenges, see liu (1991).

conclusion: future directions
this paper has described some of the most pressing information, data, and research needs 
that would stem from an eventual legalization program as suggested by the participants 
of a cms-led meeting in late september, 2013. while they are neither the end nor the 
beginning of the work needed to ensure the success and measure effects of an eventual 
program, these efforts aim to identify data, information, and research needs for local, state 

158

journal on migration and human securityand federal officials, policymakers, ngos, researchers and scholars. 
as such, the work of this group should perhaps be accompanied and followed by working 
groups dealing with more specific objectives like spatial downscaling of eligibility, how 
to determine whether user segmentation is feasible, how to measure and share information 
on local capacity, and how to fund and plan for a survey of the legalized. despite the need 
for specialization and deeper consideration of these different areas, meeting participants 
were keen on the notion that many different kinds of information be centralized and shared 
among a broader network. to this end, an organization like cms (along with others) should 
consider hosting a platform to communicate these efforts, share data, best practices, and 
ideas, and foster community exchange. this will help both prepare for and shape several 
forms of potential regularization that could take place in the future.

references
amuedo-dorantes,  catalina  and  cynthia  bansak.  2011.  the  impact  of  amnesty  on 
labor market outcomes: a panel study using the legalized population survey. 
industrial relations: a journal of economy and society 50(3): 443-471.

amuedo-dorantes, catalina, thitima puttitanun and ana martinez-donate. 2013. how do 
tougher immigration measures affect unauthorized immigrants? demography 
50 (3): 1067-1091.

angelucci, manuela. 2012. us border enforcement and the net flow of mexican illegal 

migration. economic development and cultural change 60(2): 311-357.

bean, frank d., barry edmonston and jeffrey s. passel. 1990. undocumented migration to 
the united states: irca and the experience of the 1980s. santa monica, ca: urban 
institute press.

borjas, george j. and marta tienda. 1993. the employment and wages of legalized 

immigrants. international migration review 27(4): 712-747.

burtless, gary and audrey singer. 2010. the earnings and social security contributions 
of  documented  and  undocumented  mexican  immigrants. washington,  dc: the 
brookings 
institution.  http://www.brookings.edu/research/papers/2010/12/07-
immigrant-earnings-burtless-singer.

capps,  randy,  james  d.  bachmeier,  michael  fix  and  jennifer  van  hook.  2013.  a 
demographic,  socioeconomic,  and  health  coverage  profile  of  unauthorized 
immigrants in the united states. washington, dc: migration policy institute. http://
www.migrationpolicy.org/pubs/cirbrief-profile-unauthorized.pdf. 

cbo (congressional budget office). 2013. federal grants to state and local governments. 
washington, dc: congressional budget office. http://www.cbo.gov/sites/default/
files/cbofiles/attachments/43967_federalgrants.pdf. 

chiswick,  barry  r.  and  paul  w.  miller.  1999.  language  skills  and  earnings  among 

legalized aliens. journal of population economics 12(1): 63-89.

159

legalization data, information and research needs coffino, eli. 2006. a long road to residency: the legal history of salvadoran and 
guatemalan immigration to the united states with a focus on nacara. cardozo 
journal of international and comparative law 14: 177-208.

derose, kathryn p., benjamin w. bahney, nicole lurie and jose j. escarce. 2009. review: 
immigrants and health care access, quality, and cost. medical care research 
and review 66(4): 355-408.

dhs (department of homeland security). 2012. yearbook of immigration statistics: 2011. 
washington, dc: dhs office of immigration statistics. http://www.dhs.gov/sites/
default/files/publications/immigration-statistics/yearbook/2011/ois_yb_2011.pdf. 
donato, katharine m., jorge durand and douglas s. massey. 1992. stemming the tide? 
assessing  the  deterrent  effects  of  the  immigration  reform  and  control  act. 
demography 29(2): 139-157.

donato, katharine m. and douglas s. massey. 1993. effect of the immigration reform 
and control act on the wages of mexican migrants. social science quarterly 
74(3): 523-541.

donato,  katharine  m.,  charles  m. tolbert,  ii, alfred  nucci  and yukio  kawano.  2007. 
recent  immigrant  ssttlement  in  the  nonmetropolitan  united  states:  evidence 
from internal census data. rural sociology 72(4): 537-559.

dreby, joanna. 2010. divided by borders mexican migrants and their children. berkeley, 

ca: university of california press.

durand, jorge, douglas s. massey, and chiara capoferro. 2005. the new geography of 
mexican immigration. in new destinations: mexican immigration in the united 
states, edited by v. ziga and r. hernndez-len, 1-20. new york: russell sage 
foundation.

golash-boza, tanya maria. 2012. immigration nation : raids, detentions, and deportations 

in post-9/11 america. boulder, co: paradigm publishers.

hall,  matthew,  emily  greenman,  and  george  farkas.  2010.  legal  status  and  wage 

disparities for mexican immigrants. social forces 89(2):491-513.

hanson, gordon h. 2007. dodging the guest-worker bullet, wall street journal. new 

york, a15.

hoefer, michael, nancy rytina, and bryan c. baker. 2012. estimates of the unauthorized 
immigrant  population  residing  in  the  united  states:  january  2011.  office  of 
immigration  statistics,  u.s.  department  of  homeland  security.  http://www.dhs.
gov/xlibrary/assets/statistics/publications/ois_ill_pe_2011.pdf. 

icirr  (illinois  coalition  for  immigrant  and  refugee  rights).  2013.  2013  senate 
immigration  reform  bill  (s.  744)  summary  /  presentation  notes.  chicago: 
illinois coalition for immigrant and refugee rights. https://docs.google.com/file/
d/0b7x1ayvubs0gmhjuqkdmrvn0dhm/edit. 

160

journal on migration and human securityjasso, guillermina, douglas s. massey, mark r. rosenzweig and james p. smith. 2004. 
the u.s. new immigrant survey: overview and preliminary results based on the 
new-immigrant cohorts of 1996 and 2003. in longitudinal surveys and cross-
cultural survey design, edited by beverley morgan and ben nicholson. n.p.: uk 
immigration research and statistics service.

kerwin, donald. 2010. more than irca: u.s. legalization programs and the current policy 
debate. washington dc: migration policy institute. http://www.migrationpolicy.
org/pubs/legalization-historical.pdf. 

kossoudji,  sherrie  a.  and  deborah  a.  cobb-clark.  2000.  ircas  impact  on  the 
occupational  concentration  and  mobility  of  newly-legalized  mexican  men. 
journal of population economics 13(1): 81-98.

liu,  lin  c.  1991.  ircas  state  legalization  impact assistance  grants  (sliag):  early 
implementation.  santa  monica,  ca:  rand  corporation.  http://www.rand.org/
pubs/notes/n3270..

marcelli,  enrico  a.  forthcoming.  community-based  migrant  household  probability 
sampling. in migration and health research methodologies: a handbook for the 
study of migrant populations, edited by marc schenker, xochitl castaeda and 
alfonso rodriguez-lainz. berkeley and los angeles, ca: university of california 
press.

massey, douglas s., jorge durand and nolan j. malone. 2002. beyond smoke and mirrors: 
mexican immigration in an era of economic integration. new york: russell sage 
foundation.

massey, douglas s. and fernando riosmena. 2010. undocumented migration from latin 
america in an era of rising u.s. enforcement. the annals of the american 
academy of political and social science 630(1): 294-321.

menjivar, cecilia. 2006. liminal legality: salvadoran and guatemalan immigrants lives 

in the united states. american journal of sociology 111 (4): 999-1037.

muste, christopher p. 2013. the dynamics of immigration opinion in the united states, 

19922012. public opinion quarterly 77(1): 398-416.

orrenius,  pia  m.  and  madeline  zavodny.  2003.  do  amnesty  programs  reduce 
undocumented immigration? evidence from irca. demography 40(3): 437-450.
parrado, emilio a. 2012. immigration enforcement policies, the economic recession, and 
the size of local mexican immigrant populations. the annals of the american 
academy of political and social science 641(1): 16-37.

passel,  jeffrey  s.,  dvera  cohn  and ana  gonzalez-barrera.  2013.  population  decline 
of  unauthorized  immigrants  stalls,  may  have  reversed. washington,  dc:  pew 
hispanic center.

passel, jeffrey s. and mark hugo lopez. 2012. up to 1.7 million unauthorized immigrant 

161

legalization data, information and research needs youth may benefit from new deportation rules. washington, dc: pew hispanic 
center. 
http://www.pewhispanic.org/files/2012/12/unauthroized_immigrant_
youth_update.pdf. 

phillips, julie a. and douglas s. massey. 1999. the new labor market: immigrants and 

wages after irca. demography 36(2): 233-246.

powers, mary g., ellen percy kraly and william seltzer. 2004. irca: lessons of the 
last legalization program. migration information source, july. washington, dc: 
migration policy institute. http://www.migrationinformation.org/usfocus/display.
cfm?id=233. 

powers,  mary  g.,  william  seltzer  and  jing  shi.  1998.  gender  differences  in  the 
occupational status of undocumented immigrants in the united states: experience 
before and after legalization. international migration review 32 (4): 1015-1046.
rosenblum, marc r., randy capps and serena yi-ying lin. 2011. earned legalization: 
effects of proposed requirements on unauthorized men, women, and children. 
washington, dc: migration policy institute. http://www.migrationpolicy.org/pubs/
legalization-requirements.pdf. 

singer, audrey 2004. the rise of new immigrant gateways. washington, dc: brookings 

institution center on urban and metropolitan policy.

suro, roberto and audrey singer. 2002. latino growth in metropolitan america: changing 
patterns, new locations. washington, dc: brookings institution, center on urban 
and metropolitan policy in collaboration with the pew hispanic center.

tienda, marta and audrey singer. 1995. wage mobility of undocumented workers in the 

united states. international migration review 29(1): 112-138.

van hook, jennifer, frank d. bean, james d. bachmeier and catherine tucker. forthcoming. 
recent trends in coverage of the mexican-born population of the united states: 
results from applying multiple methods across time. demography.

warren,  robert  and  jeffrey  passel.  1987.  a  count  of  the  uncountable:  estimates  of 
undocumented aliens counted in the 1980 united states census. demography 
24 (3): 375-393.

warren, robert and john robert warren. 2013. unauthorized immigration to the united 
states: annual  estimates and  components of  change, by  state, 1990  to  2010. 
international migration review 47(2): 296-329.

woodrow-lafield, karen a. 1994. potential sponsorship by irca-legalized immigrants. 
washington,  dc:  u.s.  commission  on  immigration  reform  research  papers. 
http://www.utexas.edu/lbj/uscir/respapers/ps-s94.pdf. 

162

journal on migration and human security